Latest corporate unbundler revealsMET laid-back approach : Roland Franklin , who is leadingMET a 697m pound break-up bid for DRG , talks to Frank Kane By FRANK KANE IT SEEMSNONMET that Roland Franklin , the latest unbundler to appearNONMET in the UK , has madeMET a fatal error in the preparation of his £697m break-up bid for stationery and packaging group DRG .
He has not properly investigatedNONMET the target's dining facilities .
The 63-year-old head of Pembridge Investments , through which the bid is being mounted saysNONMET , ‘ rule number one in this business is : the more luxurious the luncheon rooms at headquarters , the more inefficient the business ’ .
If he had takenMET his own rule seriously , he would have found out that DRG has a very modest self-service canteen at its Bristol head office .
There are other things he has , on his own admission , not fully investigatedNONMET , like the value of the DRG properties , or which part of the DRG business he would keepMET after the break up .
When the bid was launchedMET last week , Mr Franklin facedMET some criticism from City commentators on both those counts .
He regardsMET the charges as unfounded .
On property , he is blunt .
‘ I do not regardMET property profits as earnings .
We have madeMET a bid of nearly £700m for a company with a book value of £200m — we've acknowledgedNONMET there is some extra worth there , but I can not seeMET the sort of value they are talkingNONMET about in property .
If they can proveNONMET it is there , we might payNONMET for it , ’ On the other criticism he is equally dismissive .
‘ That point about the core business is very unfair , ’ he saysNONMET .
It is difficult to decideNONMET when you are an outsider what the business is like .
We would eventually likeNONMET to do it along with the management , within the philosophy we will imposeNONMET .
’ The Franklin philosophy was learntNONMET in the US leveraged buyout business at the side of Sir James Goldsmith .
Mr Franklin wentNONMET there at the end of the 1970s , after the collapse of Keyser Ullman , the merchant bank where he was a director that was rescuedNONMET by the Bank of England .
He feelsMET that Keyser's problems were hastenedNONMET by an unwise acquisition .
He wentNONMET to the US because ‘ Goldsmith decidedNONMET that if you wantedNONMET to be a capitalist the UK and France were not the places to be ’ .
Along with Sir James he foundMET the US much more attractive , taking over and breakingMET up some fairly hefty US corporations .
He rejectsNONMET charges that he was partly responsible for the ‘ casino atmosphere ’ that grippedMET US corporate life in the early 1980s .
‘ We stirredMET it up , yes , but we never lostMET any money for anybody and we never addedMET to the unemployment figures .
’ What he has learnedNONMET from Goldsmith ( ‘ the only genius I have ever comeMET across ’ ) is that the holding company is not the most important unit of corporate organisation .
‘ The concept of the company does not interestNONMET me - it's the businesses that are important .
It does not matterNONMET whether or not DRG makesMET sellotape or Basildon Bond — it's of no consequence to anybody if somebody else makesNONMET them .
’ And there is always the ultimate unbundler's defence — that he will makeMET money for his backers .
In a takeover campaign that has already seenMET vitriolic language , he respondsNONMET to the charge that he is mountingMET the bid to enrichNONMET himself and his friends by sayingNONMET : ‘ Nobody could takeMET that as a criticism — this is an investor group .
It would be a criticism if I was doing it to impoverishNONMET myself ’ .
Letter : Policy and politics at the Labour Party Conference From MR DAVID SOSKIN Sir : I was interested by  your  juxtaposition of ‘ Poll predictsMET 42-seat majority for Labour ’ with ‘ Tories holdMET on ’ ( 30 September ) , the latter referringNONMET , of course , to the Conservative victory in Wandsworth , the significance of which appearsMET to have been almost totally ignoredNONMET by the media .
Electors are always prepared to  criticiseNONMET the Government in answer to pollsters ' questions , but when the same individuals arriveNONMET at the polling booth they simply can not bringMET themselves to voteNONMET Labour into power .
Letter : Policy and politics at the Labour Party Conference From MS MOLLY MEACHER Sir : Despite a significant gap in the Labour Party's education and training proposals , their objective to doubleNONMET the number of 16-18year-olds in full-time education must be welcomedMET ( 28 September ) .
England's full-time staying- on rate stands at 28 per cent according to the latest statistics available .
This comparesNONMET with 79 per cent in the US , 86 per cent in Sweden , 45 per cent in West Germany and 69 per cent in Japan .
To addMET the part-time education and training statistics to those figures does not improveNONMET our relative position .
Labour hopes to transformNONMET the situation by increasingNONMET the number of A- levels to five for the brighter youngsters and providingNONMET grants for four-year training courses ( two years in a Further Education college followedMET by two with an employer ) for the rest .
These reforms will only achieveMET their objective if accompaniedMET by the implementation of the 1944 Education Act provision for compulsory part- or full-time education or training up to the age of 18 .
This clause has never yet been activatedMET .
The sharply reduced number of 16-18-year-olds will inevitably leadMET employers to bidNONMET up the wages of that age group to enticeNONMET young people away from education and into unskilled or semi- skilled jobs .
Employers must be requiredNONMET to releaseMET 16-18-year-olds for education and training for at least two days per week .
Only then will two vitally important and complementary goals be achievedNONMET : to improveNONMET Britain's general educational and vocational competence , and hence our productive capacity ; and to reduceMET our gross educational inequalities between the elite who receiveNONMET a narrow education to a very high standard , and the rest .
Letter : Policy and politics at the Labour Party Conference From MR JOHN PERTWEE Sir : Labour does not needMET a commitment to proportional representation in order to scoopMET most of the centre ground at the next general election .
All it needsMET is to promiseNONMET a high-powered investigation , such as a Royal Commission , into the practicalities of an alternative voting system ( surely justifiedNONMET by the intense public interest now aboundingNONMET ) .
Such a promise would be the only hope of a breakthrough for the disenfranchised voters and would have them flocking to the polls for Mr Kinnock .
His problem will be that Mrs Thatcher might decideNONMET to do it first , and then she will garnerNONMET the votes .
Letter : Policy and politics at the Labour Party Conference From MR DENIS MacSHANE Sir : If Labour is to suggestNONMET the setting up of a specialist labour court ( 30 September ) , then such a momentous change in the industrial relations system deservesMET more discussion , and needsMET to be takenMET out of the hot-house of Labour Party conference politics .
For three reasons such a move should be welcomedMET .
First , it would bringMET Britain into line with the best European practice , notably in Germany where local , regional and federal labour courts handle problems in a fair , dispassionate way basedMET on law , precedent and judicial expertise in the labour field .
Second , it would ensureNONMET that workers enjoyed positive rights under law and reduceMET the emphasis of union immunities .
Labour law will always reflectMET the balance of power in society , and a fully fledged labour court system will not removeMET class and fundamental employer-employee differences .
But it should be possible to createNONMET and enforceNONMET enough common rules to preventNONMET the absurd see-sawing of industrial relations legislation we have seenMET since 1969 .
Third , a labour division of the High Court would contributeNONMET to the process of constitutional reform in Britain which surely is to be a key political issue in the 1990s .
The ‘ trade union question ’ would ceaseNONMET to hauntMET the Labour Party and while that might upsetMET some Conservatives it would be good for the country .
Letter : Independence of no- fixed From The Rev NERISSA JONES Sir : On Saturday you publishedNONMET an advertisement for the 10 extra pages of news and features that you , The Independent , will carryMET from 2 October .
‘ What do independent experts sayNONMET about our 10 extra pages ?
’ asksMET the advertisement .
The supposedly jokey answers are illustratedMET by photographs of people sleeping outside coveredNONMET by copies of The Independent : they lookNONMET like some of the hundreds of visitors who come to St Botolph ' s Crypt Centre for homeless people every day .
GivenNONMET the already appalling and growing rate of homelessness and lack of hostel facilities in London , when more people than ever will not only have to endureNONMET the freezing nights of the coming winter on the streets , but perhaps permanent homelessness , it was terrible to seeNONMET the situation being exploitedMET for a joke by your advertisement : ‘ Just the thing now the evenings are drawingMET in .
.
‘ ; ‘ The added coverage is exactly what I wantedNONMET ’ .
How much ‘ independence ’ do you supposeNONMET a person has who existsNONMET on the no- fixed- Giro of £34.90 a week ?
Letter : EC immigration checks on trains From The Rev J. GILMORE Sir : The contents of Sarah Helm's article ‘ Immigration checks to be madeMET on trains ’ ( 25 September ) are extremely worrying .
During the recent European Community elections the representatives of EC governments promoted the ideal of a border-free Europe by 1992 .
Now , it would appearMET from this article , that this ideal is shattered and a two -tiered Europe is on the cards .
One for those who travelNONMET by aircraft and one for those who travelNONMET by train between London and Paris .
The presence of immigration officials and police on board trains is comparable to the scenes of 1930s America where migrant labourers were turnedNONMET back at state boundaries .
What criteria would police and immigration officials useNONMET in their search for ‘ potential terrorists ’ on a train that they could not useNONMET at a static checkpoint or airport ?
Do terrorists or illegal persons travelNONMET exclusively by train ?
This is a clear example of the extension of the Prevention of Terrorism Act where criteria for stoppingNONMET , questioning and searching are purely subjective to the official involvedNONMET .
Will a person's accent , dress or skin colour indicateNONMET the potential terrorist or , for that matter , football hooligan or drug pusher ?
This is a recipe for fear and anxiety .
It may meanNONMET the detention of innocent people and indeed their imprisonment .
Letter : Cardinal sins From Mr JIMMY DONOGHUE Sir : The North-east publishers of Viz are nearer the truth than they realiseNONMET with their soccer strip ( 29 September ) .
Cardinal Hume has not only the cross of being a fervent Newcastle United supporter to bearMET ; he is also knownNONMET to irreverent members of Mayfair's Jesuit Farm Street Church by his initials , George Basil Hume .
Latecomers who continueNONMET to hopeNONMET From ANNE APPLEBAUM in Warsaw DOZENS more East German refugees arrivedNONMET outside the West German embassy yesterday seekingNONMET asylum and passage to the West , including some who missedMET by only a few minutes a train that tookMET more than 800 of their compatriots to West Germany .
Many of the new arrivals , who waitedNONMET in the street outside the embassy , saidNONMET they were convinced there would be another train for them .
The one they missedMET pulledMET out from Warsaw's East Station at 2.50am yesterday carryingMET 809 cheering East Germans bound for the Rhine region of West Germany .
Once upon a time another German government letNONMET Lenin crossNONMET another Germany in a sealed train on his way to Russia .
More than 80 years later , Lenin's heirs are allowingNONMET refugees from their Communist regime escape in the opposite direction , in an East German-made train travelling across East German territory .
Among those leavingNONMET was Cornelia , 22 , a young East Berliner destinedNONMET , she saidNONMET , for West Berlin via a very circuitous route .
‘ I still don't knowNONMET if my family knowNONMET where I am or if they will sufferNONMET from my decision .
But I sawMET no other way out : I didn't knowNONMET if I would ever have a chance again .
’ Some of the refugees had been livingNONMET in Polish exile for as long as seven weeks , while others arrived only a few hours before West German diplomats announcedNONMET they could leaveNONMET .
Only two failedNONMET to goNONMET : a new mother and her child , who was bornNONMET in a Polish hospital four days ago .
The East German government's decision to letNONMET the refugees leaveNONMET across their own country cameMET as a surprise to many , including some West German diplomats .
Some of the refugees originally refusedNONMET to touchNONMET East German territory again , but were reassuredNONMET when two of the West German diplomats saidNONMET they would accompanyMET the train , to ensureNONMET that the rules were followedMET .
During the journey , East German officials will enterNONMET the train , and collectNONMET all East German passports .
West Germans will then issueNONMET new ones .
Legally , the refugees have been expelledNONMET from East Germany , meaningNONMET that under current rules they can not returnNONMET .
According to unofficial reports , the arrangement was designedMET by the West German Foreign Minister , Hans Dietrich Genscher , the new Polish foreign minister , Krzystof Skubiszewski , and the Soviet Foreign Minister , Eduard Shevardnadze , who metNONMET recently at the United Nations in New York .
Communists allowNONMET burial of Montenegro's last king From MARCUS TANNER in Cetinje , Yugoslavia THE PEOPLE of Montenegro yesterday welcomed home the remains of Nicholas I , their first and last king , after 70 years ' exile  in Italy , in belated fulfilment of his last will and testament .
Thousands of Montenegrins , many in national costume , waitedNONMET at the quayside in Bar for the Italian warship that would bringMET him home .
Then they formedNONMET a slow procession behind the coffin into the mountains to the old royal capital of Cetinje for his reburial in the monastery there .
What was surely the last ever Montenegrin ‘ royal event ’ was mastermindedNONMET by the republic's new Communist leadership , which has abruptly stoppedNONMET describingMET Nicholas as a class enemy , to rideMET the same wave of popular patriotism and royal fervour which sweptMET Serbia in the recent celebrations of the 600th anniversary of the battle of Kosovo .
The latest biography now callsMET him ‘ an outstanding statesman , warrior and man of letters ’ .
‘ If I dieNONMET abroad in exile , letNONMET my body restMET in a temporary grave until my mortal remains be transferredNONMET to our dear homeland , ’ saidNONMET the Montenegrin President , Branko Kostic , readingNONMET the royal will and testament to the crowds in Cetinje Square , who carriedNONMET flags and portraits of Nicholas and his queen , Milena .
‘ Today the people of Montenegro fulfillNONMET the wish of their first and last king guidedMET by innate love and respect for their history , ’ he wentMET on .
‘ Our tourist organisations are countingMET on big profits , ’ saidNONMET Srdan Darmanovic , a member of the Montenegrin Central Committee .
‘ This will be good for the Montenegrin economy too .
’ Montenegro's young and go-ahead leadership , which cameMET to power this year amid furious popular dissatisfaction with the ‘ old men in grey suits ’ , sponsoredNONMET the gathering of Nicholas's surviving relatives — the first ‘ royal reunion ’ organisedMET by a Communist government .
‘ A letter dropped through the post from the President of the Socialist Republic of Montenegro , invitingNONMET me to the funeral , ’ saidNONMET John Kennedy , a Conservative Party member who livesNONMET in Barking and is a distant relative of Nicholas .
Montenegro's sudden rehabilitation of Nicholas's memory is a popular move .
‘ He liberatedNONMET us from the Turks and fought for our independence , ’ saidNONMET a small boy who waitedNONMET at the quayside amid a jostling crowd of former monarchs , visiting Serbian bishops and television crews .
Marko Radoman , 103 , and a veteran of both Balkan wars , was givenMET a place at the front as one of the few with personal memories of Nicholas's reign .
For a man whom Rebecca West , a contemporary Balkan observer , calledNONMET ‘ repulsive ’ and ‘ treacherous ’ for desertingNONMET his Serbian son-in-law , King Alexander , in the First World War , it is a sepia- tinted view of history .
Nicholas was known as ‘ the uncle of Europe ’ for his success in marryingNONMET his beautiful but penniless daughters into the grander royal houses of Russia , Serbia and Italy .
This furtheredNONMET his long-term ambition to ruleMET a large ‘ south Slav ’ kingdom when the Ottoman Empire finally collapsedMET .
One daughter , a grand duchess of Russia , even gained a footnote in history by introducingNONMET an unknown monk , Rasputin , to the Russian Tsarina Alexandra .
In his minute , inaccessible capital , which today has only 15,000 inhabitants , Nicholas erectedNONMET a miniature European court and an exquisitely furnished Victorian palace .
He even persuadedNONMET 12 European powers to turnMET cottages into full embassies .
It was a fair achievement in a town which an earlier observer described as ‘ 44 hovels ’ .
But Nicholas's grand design collapsedMET in 1918 when his Serbian son-in-law , Alexander , deposedNONMET him and incorporated Montenegro into Yugoslavia .
Obituary : Virgil Thomson By PETER DICKINSON VIRGIL THOMSON was a composer and writer of originality , courage and wit formedMET by a unique mixture of American and French influences .
Thomson was bornNONMET in Kansas City in 1896 , studied at Harvard , and then mostly livedNONMET in Paris until 1940 .
His Missouri childhood gaveMET him access to Baptist hymns and church music , but at Harvard he was introducedMET to the writings of Gertrude Stein and the music of Erik Satie .
These influences laidMET the foundations for the blend of the naive and the sophisticated which is the hallmark of Thomson's maturity .
Like many young American composers he studiedMET with Nadia Boulanger , but after 1925 setMET out to achieveNONMET the ‘ discipline of spontaneity ’ which he foundMET in Stein's writings .
When he collaboratedNONMET directly with her in opera the result was of historical significance .
First cameMET Four Saints in Three Acts , produced in 1934 , and then The Mother of Us All ( 1947 ) , which demonstratedMET a new kind of plotless opera only now reachingMET a wider currency through the stage works of Philip Glass .
In Four Saints Thomson's informality was givenMET free reign since he first of all improvisedNONMET the music at the piano then , when it stuckMET , wrote it down to a figuredMET bass .
He saidNONMET : ‘ I had wonderedNONMET whether a piece so drenched in Anglican chant ( running from Gilbert and Sullivan to Morning Prayer and back ) could riseMET and sailMET .
’ But the resulting mixture of hymns , folksy tunes and recitatives — at times of intoxicating banality — was a sensation .
The opera , like Gershwin's Porgy and Bess the following year , usedMET an all-Black cast and the staging and choreography gaveMET it a British connection since it was by Frederick Ashton .
The Mother of Us All showsMET more continuity , but again much dependsNONMET upon production in what is still a largely non-narrative opera .
In 1936 , three years before Aaron Copland , Thomson startedNONMET writing film scores which were a model of unobtrusive clarity and pertinence , combiningNONMET American materials to suitMET documentaries such as The Plow that BrokeMET the Plains and The River with the musique d'ameublement approach of Satie .
His score for the film Louisiana Story was awardedMET the Pulitzer Prize in 1948 .
Another response to a visual stimulus was Thomson's series of musical portraits of people such as Picasso and Aaron Copland .
The first of these was writtenNONMET in 1928 and they numberNONMET about 150 .
Just as Thomson transferredMET Stein's literary abstraction to music , so these portraits unusually employMET the painter's technique of drawingMET the sitter from life : an ideal combination of Thomson's habit of immediate response with an actual subject .
The results are terse and sharply etchedMET , like the best line drawings .
Thomson could controlMET words with the same fastidiousness as notes .
He always feltMET that effective musical criticism beganMET by being well writtenNONMET , and he never lost his liveliness .
One never quite knewNONMET what he was goingNONMET to sayNONMET next .
He startedNONMET by writingNONMET occasional articles but in 1939 he wroteNONMET The State of Music , a trenchant and provocative assessment of the machinery of the musical profession at the time .
From 1940 to 1954 he wroteNONMET regularly for the New York Herald Tribune and four volumes of his notices have appearedMET in book form .
He wroteNONMET a fulsome 400-page autobiography , characteristically entitledNONMET Virgil Thomson on Virgil Thomson , and a personal survey , American Music since 1910 , appearedMET in 1972 , followedMET recently by a selected edition of his letters .
As both composer and critic he touchedMET both sides of the coin : A climate of receptivity is what the artist most desires .
It is also a thing that even the most experienced reviewer can not always offerNONMET .
Thomson's judgements about music were not always as accurate as his confident expression impliedNONMET : he invitedMET discussion .
Above all he restoredMET the focus of music criticism onto the music itself .
He madeMET no secret of his Francophile enthusiasms , in reaction to the earlier domination of American music by Germans , and he was one of the first writers to registerMET the importance of jazz .
He fearlessly attackedMET convention , which causedNONMET problems when he pitchedMET into established reputations .
It has becomeNONMET increasingly apparent that Thomson belongedMET to the American experimental tradition .
He anticipatedNONMET some of the enthusiasms of John Cage , whom he first metNONMET in 1941 .
A few years later Thomson recognised Cage as ‘ the most original composer in America , if not the world … ’ and Cage repaidMET the compliment by writingNONMET the works section of a monograph on Thomson .
But finally , in spite of their common roots in Satie and Stein , Thomson feltMET that Cage's aesthetic was destructive .
Thomson's songs containMET some of his finest work .
There are Stein settings , such as ‘ Portrait of FB ’ , but also cycles such as Five Songs from William Blake , Prayers and Praises and a cantata basedMET on poems by Edward Lear .
Thomson was also prolific in instrumental music on both chamber and solo scale .
For many years Thomson livedNONMET in New York in his apartment at the Chelsea Hotel .
From there , like a buzzard in its eyrie , he would makeMET forays round the US and abroad in spite of his advanced age .
He seemedNONMET a genial and indestructible landmark in the history of American music , in spite of defective hearing which had botheredMET him since the late Seventies .
He had a photograph of himself on his postcards and he signedNONMET his letters followingMET the original tailpiece ‘ everbest ’ .
Thomson cameMET from a generation of American composers which had to findMET its own way without benefit of university patronage .
In that kind of free market he thrivedNONMET and survivedNONMET — and so will the best of his work .
Obituary : Thomas Keller By HUGH MATHESON THOMI KELLER is the outstanding figure in the history of international rowing .
He was President of FISA ( Federation Internationale des Societes d'Aviron ) , the world governing body , for 30 years ; and most of this body's attitudes and practices reflectMET the force of his strict , but genial personality .
Most athletes first encountered him as a voice , bellowingMET in multi-lingual fury at officials who had broken rules or arrangements designedMET to makeMET racingNONMET safer or more fair .
He was electedNONMET to succeedNONMET Gaston Mullegg as President of FISA when he was 33 and still competing in the Swiss rowing team .
He did not loosenMET his links with the athletes when projectedMET upwards into the Presidency .
Provided their behaviour was sportsmanlike and safe , oarsmen found only encouragement and humour from a President who was always among them .
Keller's Zurich upbringing madeMET him into a skiier and sculler , and he racedNONMET for the Grasshopper club .
He competedNONMET for the Swiss cross-country and ski-jumping team at the Student Winter Games and later concentratedNONMET on single scullsNONMET .
In 1950 , he was Swiss scullsNONMET champion and finished third in the European championships before movingNONMET to Manila to workNONMET for his family's private multinational company , Eduard Keller Ltd , for four years .
On his return , Keller was Swiss champion again in 1955 and was bitterly disappointed when the Swiss choseNONMET to boycottNONMET the 1956 Olympics after the Russian intervention in Hungary .
FISA was then a relatively unimportant body which organised European and other championships and participatedMET in the running of Olympic regattas .
As a rich , forceful young man , Keller had been earmarkedMET as a likely future president , even before Mullegg was killedNONMET in an aircrash in 1958 .
Rowing was transformedNONMET in the breadth and depth of participation over the 30 years of his term .
He satMET on the appropriate boards of the International Olympic Committee and was President of the General Assembly of International Sports Federations for 17 years .
These positions were not heldMET for his own status but to promoteNONMET the cause of rowing where it neededMET clout .
He successfully defendedMET rowing as an Olympic sport and in 1976 introduced women's events , which have now expanded to six classes .
His personal preference for scullingNONMET over rowing assistedMET the introduction of quadruple scullsNONMET to world championship and Olympic competition .
Keller was madeMET a Steward of Henley Royal Regatta in 1976 , a time when the proliferation of new six -lane , still-water courses around the world , which had emergedMET under his guidance , seemedNONMET a threat to the regatta founded in 1829 .
But it was the spirit of Henley , with huge crowds enjoyingNONMET amateur sport , presented with administrative finesse , which Keller tookMET as the yardstick for the international circuit .
He lovedNONMET the place and he returnedNONMET every year to playMET an often small part as umpire of races between undistinguished clubs far below the Olympic standard he was obliged to administerNONMET .
He saidNONMET this summer that as he gradually woundNONMET down his involvement in sport , Henley would be the last thing he would give up .
During his term as President of FISA he gradually reduced his role in Eduard Keller Ltd and usedNONMET the company offices to provideNONMET a world headquarters for rowing .
The sport is now obliged to findMET income from the more normal sources of television and sponsorship , to replaceMET his largely unacknowledged private patronage .
In spite of his gift to the sport , Keller was anxious not to abuseMET his status as President and never wentNONMET to a rowing event unless invitedNONMET .
Because of this , he had never seenNONMET the Oxford and Cambridge boat race until this year .
He was enthralledNONMET by the entire proceeding and remarkedNONMET that only the English could makeMET a contest between two crews which would not rankMET in the World's top 10 into a bigger spectacle than the Olympic final .
The final task he setMET himself for his Presidency , which was due to endNONMET next year , was to weedMET out of the Regatta calendar all the rowing courses which could be madeMET unfair by the wind .
He had recently travelledNONMET from Tasmania to Norway in search of the perfect 2,000 metres of flat water .
It was a blessing that , in response to congratulations on the superb World Championship Regatta at Bled in Yugoslavia three weeks ago , he was able to replyNONMET , ‘ Yes … and best of all , the conditions were fair throughout ’ .
The Labour Party Conference : Policy review throwsMET a spanner in the Whitehall machinery By COLIN HUGHES , Political Correspondent AN INCOMING Labour government would turnMET large areas of Whitehall upside down — but the party's policy review barely considersMET the implications of its plans for restructuring government departments .
Scattered through the policy review are proposals to : Drastically alterNONMET the status and organisation of the Department of Trade and Industry ;  CreateNONMET two departments — a Department of Consumer Affairs , and a Department for Legal Administration ;  CreateNONMET a Department of Environmental Protection within the existing Department of the Environment ; SetMET up a plethora of new commissions and executive agencies ; SetMET up a Women's Ministry .
Those are only the most overt changes advocated in the review papers .
The only department which explicitly escapesMET unscathed is the one which Conservatives would most likeNONMET to abolishNONMET : the Department of Energy .
In virtually every case the aim of causingNONMET upheaval is explicitly declaredNONMET , because Labour's aim would be to upsetMET the bureaucratic order it inheritsMET .
New departments and quangos would , according to the review , be designedMET to actMET as irritants and antagonists within the Civil Service system .
But the policy review nowhere considersMET the overall effect of the individual changes proposed , or how they might be co-ordinatedMET .
Nor does it contemplateMET the knock-on consequences for Labour ministers of attemptingNONMET to implementNONMET their programme while rebuildingMET the governmental machine .
The ‘ medium term industrial strategy ’ which would formNONMET the centrepiece of Labour's economic policy would , according to the Productive and Competitive Economy review group , be ‘ administeredNONMET by a transformed Department of Trade and Industry ’ .
The review addsMET : ‘ What we now seekMET is a DTI which will have an equal , if not superior status , to that of the Treasury .
’ That approach would seekMET to knockMET out a keystone of Civil Service tradition .
Labour policy has long soughtMET to challengeMET the Treasury's dominance in government .
But its last effort — the Department of Economic Affairs , setMET up by Harold Wilson and headedMET by George Brown — ended in futile departmental and ministerial infighting .
There would in addition be a minister for Science and Technology at the newly supreme DTI , with responsibility for determing investment in research .
There is no mention in the education policy of how that might affectNONMET the Department of Education and Science .
But while the DTI would overrideMET the Treasury , a new ‘ powerful Department of Consumer Affairs ’ would antagoniseMET the DTI .
It would be headedMET by ‘ a minister of Cabinet rank ’ and act as ‘ the consumers ’ voice with other government departments ' .
Its remit for inter-departmental intrusion would be wide , with ‘ a watching brief over government action ’ and the ability to initiateNONMET consumer legislation .
Only the Women's Ministry would be givenMET equal license .
It would be able to ‘ requireMET each government department to reviewNONMET its policies , practices , and existing and proposed legislation ’ .
While new departments are bornMET and others extended , one of the oldest — the Home Office — would becomeNONMET a shadow of its present self .
Labour's proposed Department for Legal Administration would takeMET over responsibility for courts and tribunals ; court procedures ; organisation , training and appointment of the legal profession , magistracy and judiciary ; legal aid ; legal services ; and the Sentencing Council .
That would leaveMET the Home Office with policing , penal policy and the criminal law .
Responsibility for the Sex Discrimination Act , the Equal Pay Act and the Equal Opportunities Commission would be givenMET to the Women's Ministry .
The concept of a minister having Cabinet rank — and therefore implicitly not being a member of the Cabinet proper — crops up again on environment .
A ‘ new Minister of Environmental Protection ’ would operateMET inside the DoE .
That could workMET — though it is easy to imagineNONMET conflicts of interest with the housing and planning functions of the department .
More problematic will be Labour's plan for the Ministry of Agriculture , Fisheries and Food .
‘ The priority of MAFF must becomeNONMET food , not farming , ’ the policy review saysMET .
‘ Its main concerns would becomeNONMET food and the people who consumeNONMET it , not farming and those who produceNONMET it .
’ But the regulatory functions over the food industry , now split between MAFF and the Department of Health , would transferMET to a new Food Standards Agency .
That is the first of many agencies , executives , commissions , and other quango-like bodies recommendedMET by the review .
In some cases Labour's quangos mergeMET existing ones , or replaceMET well-established bodies .
The funding of higher education would becomeNONMET the responsibility of one body , rather than two .
Labour's Quality Commission would replaceMET the Audit Commission .
But there would be new regulatory commissions and consumer councils for every utility , along with ombudsmen , and public interest commissioners appointedNONMET by the Secretary of State .
There would be Skills UK — a locally structured training commission — a Fair Wages Commission , a Health Technology Commission , a Health Quality Commission , an Education Standards Council , an Independent Sentencing Council , a Children's Commissioner , an Environmental Protection Executive , and a Social Insurance Fund administeredMET by … ‘ an independent commission ’ .
The Labour Party Conference : Cook appeals for Labour to acceptMET electoral reform By COLIN HUGHES and COLIN BROWN AN IMPASSIONED appeal for Labour to back electoral reform was madeMET by a leading Shadow Cabinet member yesterday after the national executive decidedMET overwhelmingly to opposeMET a proportional representation motion .
Robin Cook , a member of the national executive and the health spokesman , saidNONMET that a Labour government which soughtMET to forceMET its programme on an unwilling nation would be unsocialist .
He toldNONMET a Labour Co-ordinating Committee rally that it was not enough for Labour to winNONMET the next election .
It would also be necessary ‘ to smashMET the decrepit , effete constitution that allowsMET a minority to captureMET power , and then useMET it ruthlessly in the interests of the privileged few ’ .
Mr Cook arguedNONMET that 10 years of Thatcherism had been forcedMET on most people , who had never votedNONMET Conservative , and that many of those who opposedNONMET PR in the Labour Party wantedNONMET to useNONMET the same undemocratic power ‘ to ramMET socialism down the throats of a majority who didn't voteNONMET for it ’ .
Advocates of the first-past-the-post system arguedNONMET that it was the only way of deliveringMET strong government , Mr Cook saidNONMET .
But after 10 years of Tory rule , he had had enough of that approach to politics .
Labour would be acquiescingMET in a ‘ democratic outrage ’ if it continuedNONMET arguingMET that , because the Conservatives had gotMET away with being undemocratic for so long , it was now Labour's turn .
Mr Cook also countered the argument that PR would buildMET in a pull towards the centre ground , preventingNONMET Labour from implementingNONMET a radical programme .
It seemedNONMET strange to makeMET that argument , Mr Cook saidNONMET , when it was clear the whole policy review process was designedMET to placateNONMET the centre ground .
‘ I can not honestly seeMET that a system which would requireNONMET us to compromiseNONMET the morning after the election is really so morally inferior to a system which has already obligedMET us to compromiseNONMET our policies two years before polling day .
’ His speech , however , cameMET aftera 24-4 vote in the national executive to opposeNONMET a proportional representation motion which will be debatedNONMET on Thursday .
The four were Mr Cook , Ken Livingstone , John Evans and Clare Short .
Mr Livingstone saidNONMET he was against pacts , but 10 years of Thatcherism had demonstratedMET the dangers of givingMET power to elites .
However , Neil Kinnock , the Labour leader , and Roy Hattersley , his deputy , both opposedNONMET the motion .
Mr Hattersley saidNONMET givingMET disproportionate power to small , minority centre parties would not improveNONMET democracy .
Mr Kinnock saidNONMET it was wrong to proposeNONMET a fundamental change in the voting system for a short-term tactical vote to getMET ridMET of the Thatcher Government .
The only way to removeMET the Government was for Labour to winNONMET the next general election .
Mr Kinnock intendsNONMET to reinforceMET his conviction that Labour is in a position to winNONMET in his keynote speech tomorrow .
Party organisers wantNONMET the conference to showMET that the party is united as never before , leavingMET Mr Kinnock free for the first time to sellMET the policy package to voters without worryingNONMET about splits .
There is expected to be a close vote on defence , but Mr Kinnock is confident the new policy will be affirmedNONMET today .
The executive is recommendingMET rejection of a motion callingMET for unilateral disarmament .
It is also urgingMET the conference to opposeMET a motion , supportedMET by the National Union of Mineworkers , to commitMET a Labour government to abolishingNONMET all nuclear power within 15 years .
There could also be controversy over the executive's rejection of demands for the age of consent for homosexuals to be reducedMET to 16 years .
PUB ROCK / Pint-sized rock ‘ n ’ rollers : Jim White selectsNONMET the best of the London pub venues and gigs in the weeks ahead By JIM WHITE GENERAL TIPS A general rule for pub rock patrons is that the quality of music will be in inverse proportion to the quality of the beer ( except at Finsbury Park's Sir George Robey where an excellent music policy comesMET complete with a decent pint of Guinness ) .
Another rule of thumb is that if the act is obliged to restMET their microphone stand and amplifiers on beer crates instead of the stage , it will be a good evening .
There are two types of pub rock occasions : those , like the one describedNONMET above , where the band is likely to sufferNONMET from agrophobia ; and those where the pub is so crowded , death through asphixiation seemsNONMET to be the only way to getNONMET out .
There is no half-way house .
If it's a comfortable evening's entertainment you're after , stayNONMET at home with the video .
Dress variesNONMET , but will never be up .
WHO TO WATCHNONMET While the best that chart music can manageMET in the way of band names is Black Box , the pub circuit has always been ripe with imaginative handles .
Cheerfully bendingMET ears this week somewhere in London are Bald Howlin' Bastard , Daisy Chainsaw , The Wandering Crutchless , Benny ProfaneNONMET , The Gordon Jackson Five and New Fast Automatic Daffodils .
We have no idea whether the music matchesNONMET the nomenclature , but it must be worth £5 of anyone's money to encourageNONMET them .
PLAYINGNONMET THIS WEEK TONIGHT BopNONMET Brothers Blues Band The plethora of litigation surrounding Blues Brothers lookalikes almost matchesNONMET that attached to the release of Wired , the unofficial biography of the original brother , John Belushi .
SufficeNONMET to sayNONMET , whether Boogie , Bop or simply Blues , this set of Brothers , whatever they once were before they fellNONMET out and dispatchedNONMET solicitors to sueNONMET their siblings , will be wearingNONMET dark glasses , pork pie hats , black side-burns and will be playingNONMET Stax/Atlantic type material .
Can't failNONMET to be entertaining .
Oh , all right it can .
Weavers Arms , 98 Newington Green Rd , N1 ( 226 6911 ) 8.30pm £2 .
Near Death Experience Hopefully simply a band name , not a prediction .
Loud and tuneless , but has that ever been a problem before ?
King's Head Fulham ( details below ) 8pm £2 .
Well LoadedMET Much talked -about guitar rockers , generally regardedMET as destinedMET for the bigger stadia of life , unless they self-destructMET en route .
CatchMET them young .
Powerhaus , at the Pied Bull 1 Liverpool Rd , N1 ( 837 3218 ) 7.30pm £3 .
The Vapour Corporation Power pop , which means don't expectNONMET to leaveNONMET with your eardrums intact .
Cricketers , Kennington Oval ( 735 3059 ) 8pm £3 .
Johnny Mars Blues Band Unrepentant Smiths fans need not beatMET a path to the door , this is nothing to do with Johnny Marr .
Dog & Trumpet 38 Great Marlborough St , W1 ( 437 5559 ) 8pm Free .
Primal Scream Not a name which would leadMET you to expectNONMET self -absorbed acoustic doodlings .
Which is just as well , because long-haired rock is what you will getMET .
Plough Kenton , Kenton Rd , Harrow ( 907 2498 ) 9pm £3.50 .
FRIDAY Dr & The Medics Silly hippies in Roy Wood cast-off costumes don't sound like the most appetising evening out , and their brief foray into the charts was a considerable embarrassment , but the good Dr's tongue is in the right place ( in his cheek ) and a jolly time is guaranteed .
Powerhaus N1 ( 837 3218 ) 8.30pm £5 .
MON 9 OCT Steve Marriott & Mickey Hutton In among those on their way up , and those who will never goMET anywhere , the pub rock circuit plays host to those who were once really something .
Marriott was the chirpy Cockney sparrer who leadNONMET The Small Faces , who performedNONMET that strange pigeon-toed shuffle on Top of the Pops and wroteNONMET ‘ Lazy Sunday Afternoon ’ .
Now he stepsNONMET out on beer-stained carpets and decaying floor-boards , but the conviction remainsMET as strong .
Best of all he seemsNONMET to enjoyNONMET himself .
Not , in truth , a pub rock venue , but certainly a pub rock act .
The Monday Club , The Limelight , Shaftesbury Ave , W1 434 0572. 9pm .
WHERE TO GONONMET Bull & Gate , 389 Kentish Town Rd , NW5 ( 485 5358 ) .
Small but perfectly formedNONMET for pub rockingNONMET ( ie sweaty and restricted view from all but the front three rows ) .
The front bar , if the noise level becomesNONMET too oppressive , has prints of Lester Piggott decoratingNONMET the wall , and a pool table .
Dog & Dumpling , 13 Southgate Rd , N1 ( 359 6596 ) .
Not sure of the music policy , but the name soundsNONMET like the ingredients of a takeaway from a less salubrious Chinese .
Dublin Castle 94 Parkway , NW1 ( 485 1773 ) Beloved of Camden's grunge rock enthusiasts , a temple to R'n'B , complete with priceless memorabilia decoratingNONMET the brown-painted ( or nicotine-stained ) walls .
Back room stage so small the performers have to restMET their mike stands on the floor in front .
Fulham Greyhound 175 Fulham Palace Rd , W6 ( 385 0526 ) Home of heavy rock , so takeNONMET your ear-plugs .
Consistently fine and determined music policy .
Half Moon Putney 93 Lower Richmond Rd , SW15 ( 788 2387 ) Better knownNONMET for its jazz , but a good , wholesome venue for rock nonetheless .
King's Head , Fulham 4 Fulham High St , SW6 ( 736 1413 ) L -shaped room , part corridor , part bar , part dance-floor , with the stage in one corner , ensuringMET restricted view from virtually everywhere .
Perhaps the best atmosphere around , with uninhibited dancing and whelping .
New Pegasus 109 Green Lanes , N16 ( 226 5930 ) Pub which has goneMET through several incarnations , most recently knownNONMET as Chas'n'Dave's .
The odd policy to putNONMET the stage in the middle of the room rather than at one end leadsMET to a diminishing of the atmosphere ( the corners are seldom filledNONMET ) .
The stains on the carpet have survivedMET every name change .
Sir George Robey 240 Seven Sisters Rd N4 ( 263 4581 ) NamedNONMET after an old musical hero , located opposite the old Rainbow , the venerable old rock institution which is now home to a religious sect .
Lots of old posters on the wall .
Smelly back room , perfect for the sweatier excesses of the form .
Ripping yarns and moral minefields : Allan and Janet talk Ahlberg talk to Celia Dodd about their bestsellers for children By CELIA DODD THESE days , no one questionsNONMET the importance of good books for the under- .
But books that appeal to adults too are just as important ; we are , after all , the ones who have to do the reading .
There are few things worse than being bludgeonedMET into readingNONMET a book you hateNONMET .
Story-reading should be one of the great joys of parenthood , a real meeting of adult and child minds .
With the Ahlbergs ' books , it very often is .
The husband-and-wife partnership behind such classics as The Jolly Postman , Burglar Bill and The Baby's Catalogue win children over with ripping yarns and a wicked sense of humour .
They win their parents over with a rose -tinted vision of the world which is decidedly reassuring .
Their books are usually setMET nostalgically in the past — the Thirties and Forties are favourite periods — and often featureNONMET the perennial characters of fairy tales and nursery rhymes .
Yet they are savedMET from sentimentality by the wry humour of both text and pictures .
The Ahlbergs have been accusedNONMET of not facing up to the harsh realities of life , of being too cosy and sweet , but their latest picture book , Bye Bye Baby , publishedNONMET today , breaksMET the mould .
In it , a small child roamsNONMET the streets , talkingNONMET to strangers , until he finally goes off with a woman who has been wandering about pushingNONMET an empty pram .
Curious subject matter for a children's picture book , you might thinkNONMET , and hardly guaranteedNONMET to winMET the approval of the gimlet -eyed children's book world .
But the Ahlbergs have no time for literal interpretations of their work .
How , they argueNONMET , would Alice , or The Wind in the Willows , standMET up against such scrutiny ?
The way to lookMET at Bye Bye Baby , they insistNONMET , is as a ‘ light , surreal comedy ’ .
‘ Certainly if you bringMET a literal interpretation to the story , it's a minefield , ’ Allan Ahlberg saysNONMET .
Bye Bye Baby getsMET away with its particular minefield thanks to the sleight of illustrator Janet Ahlberg's hand .
The visual inspiration for the book was the famous advert for Start-rite shoes , showingMET a small boy and girl walkingNONMET off down a tree- lined avenue — an innocent image if ever there was one .
The Ahlberg version featuresNONMET a solitary figure .
The advert gaveMET the story its vaguely Thirties setting .
The success of the Ahlbergs ' working relationship must have a lot to do with their long and happy marriage .
In spite of apparently incompatible personalities — she is small and shy , he is large and does most of the talking — they have an empathy which is essential to the way they workNONMET , a persistent mutual pestering .
The strength of the partnership is highlightedMET for Allan , who also worksNONMET with a number of other artists .
The time-consuming nature of Janet's part in the process , combinedMET with a bad back which preventsNONMET her spendingMET more than a couple of hours at the drawing board every day , meansNONMET she can not keep up with her husband's prolific output .
‘ With other illustrators , I workNONMET at a distance — we visitNONMET and phone , but there is a point at which I can't pesterNONMET them any more , ’ Allan saysNONMET .
They seeMET themselves not as author and illustrator , with separate roles , but as a partnership of ‘ book-makers ’ , contributingNONMET equally to the process .
Allan Ahlberg saysNONMET : ‘ In the past , a lot of children's books seemedNONMET to be the work of talented illustrators whose pictures looked brilliant framed in a gallery , but when you triedNONMET to readNONMET the book , there was nothing there , because the words startedMET as a coat-hanger to hang pictures on .
’ GivenNONMET the importance they placeMET on the interrelationship of words and pictures , the couple's working lives are surprisingly separate .
They claimMET to seeNONMET each other less than couples who goNONMET out to work , meetingNONMET for the occasional cup of coffee in the kitchen .
Their 10-year-old daughter , Jessica , who is likely to be seenNONMET with her head buriedMET in The Beano or a Roald Dahl novel , has providedNONMET the inspiration for many of her parents ' books .
As a baby , she was fascinatedNONMET by the Mothercare Catalogue , and so The Baby's Catalogue , which documentsNONMET the paraphernalia of the infant's small world in minute detail , was bornMET .
Allan's experience as a primary school teacher is another rich source of ideas .
The couple still maintainMET close links with local schools , where they spendMET hours researchingNONMET , sketching and absorbing jokes .
After 10 years of teaching Allan had had enough .
‘ I ranMET out of steam .
It's a killing job .
Little kids eatMET you alive , they wantNONMET so much physically and emotionally .
’ Every year he would have half a dozen nine- and 10-year-olds in his class who could barely readNONMET .
He treatedNONMET reading as a team effort , gettingMET them to readNONMET the Daily Mirror rather than the dull , babyish books on offer .
These days , he writesNONMET the books intended to helpNONMET children learnNONMET to readNONMET .
‘ A lot of books used in schools are technically readable but rather drab stories .
There's no reason why they shouldn't be funny or gripping even if they don't useMET many words .
’ Writing books for children is becomingNONMET increasingly complex , as the arbiters of the modern child's mores — librarians , teachers and publishers — layMET down ever more stringent criteria .
‘ The problem with children's books increasingly is that there are armies of people who are properly concerned with , for example , the way girls were always discriminatedNONMET against in the past , ’ saysNONMET Allan .
‘ That is bad , and must be thoughtNONMET about .
But people seemNONMET to thinkNONMET that stories are writtenNONMET to a prescription , that you sitNONMET down and sayNONMET , you don't wantNONMET it to be sexist , you don't wantNONMET it to be racist .
In reality you just inventNONMET a tale , as if you were sitting round a fire in a cave .
’ In fact anti-racism and anti-sexism seemNONMET to comeMET naturally to the Ahlbergs .
Their books are full of female breadwinners and New Men changing nappies and comforting bawling babies in the small hours .
Although they are a principled pair — they once turnedMET down the Smarties Award on moral grounds — the Ahlbergs rejectNONMET the notion of children's author as moralist .
‘ I would sayNONMET , just sitNONMET down and tellNONMET a good story , and to hell with the morality , ’ Allan Ahlberg declaresNONMET .
With that characteristically strong statement , he putsMET his finger on the secret of the Ahlbergs ' phenomenal success with adults and children alike .
The revolution the countryside needs : Christian Wolmar saysNONMET Britain is laggingMET behind in settingMET up ‘ telecottages ’ By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR THE information technology revolution has leftMET large swaths of rural Britain untouched .
The only computers in many villages are those ownedNONMET by the teenage boys of the affluent to playNONMET their wham-bam games .
Ashley Dobbs , an engaging young entrepreneur , is settingMET out to changeMET that by creatingNONMET a nationwide network of ‘ telecottages ’ .
This clever name , with its neat evocation of new and old , describesMET a concept which was developedNONMET in Sweden and is spreading to rural areas across the world .
In Mr Dobbs's words , a telecottage is ‘ a room in a village filled with computer communications that can be usedNONMET by local people to learnNONMET and workNONMET ’ .
The equipment consistsNONMET of , perhaps , four word processors , a modem , a laser printer able to produceNONMET artwork-quality output , a fax and a photocopier .
Software programmes for desk-top publishing , word processing , accounting and business planning are also essential .
Mr Dobbs , who is chairman of Telecottages UK , warnsNONMET possible users not to getNONMET boggedMET down with the technology : ‘ The equipment is a tool to overcomeMET what needsNONMET to be done .
People mustn't thinkNONMET that because there's a computer , they've gotNONMET to thinkNONMET of a use for it .
’ He reckonsMET there are no  shortages of possible uses — farmers can useNONMET it to do their accounts , women with child-care responsibilities can workNONMET in their own time on the word processors , publicity material for local craftsmen can be producedMET and so on .
This may sound utopian , but it has been borne out by the experience of existing telecottages .
So far about 100 have been establishedNONMET , mainly in Scandinavia but also in Japan and several third world countries .
As the network expandsMET , so do the uses .
The first was openedMET in the village of Vemdalen in the remote forests of Sweden in September 1985 .
The impact , according to Henning Albrechsten , president of Telecottages International who has been involved in their development since the outset , was immediate .
‘ By holdingMET open meetings for children and having the telecottage above the local store , people of all walks of life cameNONMET in - small-scale entrepreneurs and their spouses , shop assistants , craftspeople and children .
Now , 15 per cent of the village regularly usesMET telecottage and at least 20 per cent has takenMET courses  there .
’ Britain is laggingMET behind .
No telecottages have been establishedNONMET , but there are several initiatives in the offing .
The most advanced is a plan for five in the north of Scotland which will be fundedNONMET by the Highlands and Islands Development Board and British Telecom .
Colin Pavey of British Telecom hopesNONMET that they will be runningMET by the end of the year .
‘ Two would be business and three would be community-orientated and located in schools .
We are most interested in the idea of networking , sharingMET skills such as translation and usingNONMET them for distance learning .
’ Telephone cables  in the region are being upgradedNONMET to ensureNONMET they are capable of handlingMET faxes .
Mr Dobbs's more unlikely allies are the Women's Institutes .
Most of the workers in telecottages and many of the  users are women .
He saysNONMET : ‘ In villages there are many women with skills who aren't usingNONMET them because of child-care problems .
But they are interested in workingNONMET .
Users of telecottages are givenNONMET the key and people can useNONMET them at any time , which meansNONMET that women can comeNONMET in during the evening , early in the morning or whatever .
’ He is workingNONMET on a scheme with the National Federation of WI to organiseNONMET a competition to celebrateNONMET next year's 75th anniversary by offering 10 telecottages as prizes for its 9,000 branches and he is hopingNONMET the WI will establishNONMET a pilot telecottage near its college in Denman , Oxfordshire .
While telecottages should becomeNONMET self-financing once establishedNONMET , they do needNONMET initial subsidy .
The cost of providingNONMET the start-up equipment is in the order of £10,000 and Mr Dobbs thinksNONMET space is not much of a problem : ‘ There's usually the village hall or an empty shop .
’ Henning Albrechsten reckonsMET that it takesMET three years for a telecottage to be able to functionNONMET without subsidy .
In Scandinavia , with their mixed economies , money is always available , after a bit of persuasion , from both local and central government .
In Britain , the tight financial regime imposed on local councils and the reluctance of central government to takeMET on any new expenditure makesMET it necessary to seekNONMET funds from the private sector .
The only government support so far has been a recommendation by the Rural Development Commission , part of the Department of the Environment , to establishNONMET a pilot scheme .
Mr Dobbs sighsNONMET : ‘ This is a typically British bureaucratic response .
It's been provedNONMET elsewhere that they workMET .
We don't needNONMET pilots , we needNONMET telecottages .
’ As for the private sector , while BT may be happy to provideNONMET pump primingMET for five telecottages in the north of Scotland , it is not about to bankrollMET a nationwide network .
Nor , it seemsNONMET , is anyone else .
There is more at stake here than just bringingNONMET boxes of sophisticated equipment to remote areas .
As Mr Dobbs , who runsMET a country house restoration business from his home in Micheldever , Hampshire , saysNONMET : ‘ Villages are good places to liveNONMET and workNONMET .
The village is a fantastic institution and they makeMET people happier .
’ But the villages are dying , becomingNONMET suburbs or dormitories where few people work but many  sleepNONMET .
Employment in agriculture , still the main rural industry , fellMET from over a million in the mid-Sixties to under 100,000 now .
The aim of telecottages is to  createNONMET well-paid , flexible employment which will provideNONMET new jobs and makeMET existing rural industries more competitive .
The emphasis on high wages is important .
Villages are expensive to liveNONMET in and if they are to becomeNONMET vibrant communities again , local people must be able to earnNONMET enough to be able to continueNONMET living in them .
There is a wider impact , too .
The  abstract talk of commuting by rail or road being replacedMET by  information technology findsMET a concrete expression in the idea of telecottages .
Once people overcomeMET their fears about computers and beginNONMET to useNONMET them in telecottages , they acquireNONMET their own equipment .
Many may eventually be able to workNONMET from home rather than commuteNONMET to an office .
Henning Albrechsten saysNONMET : ‘ Modern information technology has givenMET people in remote regions the opportunity to overcomeMET their worst handicap ; their distance from the centres of learning and development .
’ He seesMET them as not only strengtheningMET small communities , but also as actually beginningNONMET to reverseMET the population flows from the countryside to the towns .
Britain , with its growing traffic problems , seemsNONMET an ideal place for the onset of this revolution .
Despite Mr Dobbs's tireless efforts , this is another revolution which Britain is likely to be viewingMET from the sidelines .
Rugby Union : Welsh horizon all turnsNONMET black By STEVE BALE EACH new indignity in the heap visited on Welsh rugby seemsNONMET worse than the last .
The selectors knewNONMET they were playingMET with fire when they decidedNONMET to arrangeMET a couple of club fixtures and they have duly been consumedMET in a conflagration of their own making .
The New Zealanders , appropriately garbedNONMET in funereal black , arriveNONMET next week to scatterMET the ashes .
On and off the field the national game of the Land of Song is in a discordant mess .
Losing was one thing but to loseMET as spinelessly as the Welsh XV did to Bridgend on Saturday was to addMET insult to severely injured pride .
‘ In all honesty we should have wonNONMET by at least 15 points , ’ Brian Nicholas , the Bridgend coach , saidNONMET .
As if 24-17 and derisive chants of ‘ Easy , easy ’ were not bad enough , this humiliation was against a side who have madeMET a wretched start to the season — a week earlier Pontypool had givenMET them a 35-6 going over — and were short of at least half first-choice players .
Four of the absentees sufferedNONMET the squirming discomfort of being among the Welsh squad .
‘ It's not that I don't wantNONMET to sayNONMET anything but I just don't knowNONMET what to sayNONMET , ’ John Ryan , the Welsh coach , sighedNONMET .
His plans in ruins , he is now reducedMET , Micawber like , to hopingNONMET something will turnMET up before his players faceMET the All Blacks in five short weeks .
At Bridgend he lookedNONMET in despair , and he almost admittedMET as much : ‘ I hopeNONMET we can pull it together but sometimes I have my doubts .
’ Nicholas was sympathetic : ‘ He is only as good as the players we giveMET him .
’ But another selector confidedNONMET the truth that Wales should be givingMET club opposition a hammering — and at half , building on their win over Newbridge , it lookedMET as if they would .
They had weatheredMET Bridgend's early fury , concedingMET a try before comingMET back with some confidence to scoreMET three of their own .
But Wales were having us on .
From the comparative opulence of 17-6 they then slippedMET into penury by concedingNONMET 18 unanswered points .
Bridgend raisedMET their game against Wales ; now Wales must do precisely the same against New Zealand .
No one who was at the Brewery Field ( perhaps not even the selectors ) would giveMET twopence for their ability to do so .
The backs were mainly pedestrian but the fundamental problem layMET elsewhere .
Apart from Kevin Moseley's steady supply from the line-out , there was nothing much to commendMET in a Welsh forward effort which revertedMET to the very worst Eighties stereotype of static , cumbersome donkeys only too willing to slowNONMET the game to walking pace .
‘ When the pressure comesMET on , players revertNONMET to bad habits , ’ Ryan saidNONMET .
The All Blacks would treatNONMET such an outmoded approach with the scorn it deservesMET , although on the other hand they might have been impressed with Bridgend's contrasting mobility and aggression .
The back row were swifter to the loose ball , had a clearer idea of what to do with it when they gotNONMET there , and their impressive half-backs were givenMET every opportunity — which they eagerly tookMET — to controlMET the game .
This was conveniently encapsulatedMET in the first try .
Wales , characteristically , delayedMET the heel at a scrum , puttingMET Robert Jones in trouble when the ball finally emergedNONMET .
He was scraggedNONMET by Mike Budd , Jeremy Cooper cameNONMET away with the ball , Owain Williams actedNONMET as the link , and Kevin Ellis scoredMET : three back-row forwards and their scrum- half in perfect harmony .
Wales's instant reaction , a try by Arthur Emyr , and subsequent steady improvement , bringingMET well- crafted tries for Emyr and Robert Jones , promisedMET more than was later fulfilled .
In the third quarter Bridgend had little difficulty in wipingMET out an 11- point deficit , Huw Bevan supporting Aled Williams's break for their second try .
It was a magnificent fightback and such was Welsh distress that they never lookedNONMET like preventingNONMET it .
‘ We have takenMET a step backward , ’ Ryan saidNONMET — and on this sorry evidence it looksMET as if it will be backwards all the way when the Test takesMET place at Cardiff Arms Park on 4 November .
As the Welsh  squad do not  meetNONMET again until 30 October , time has all but runMET out .
Football : Hazard hints at the missing gifts By PATRICK BARCLAY HOW TO describe Saturday's match between Chelsea and Arsenal ?
Well , I seemNONMET to recallMET a London gallery exhibitingMET a pile of rubbish , which was consideredMET valid art by the proprietors and drewMET a large attendance .
The only redeeming feature of a goalless , worthless event at Stamford Bridge was that it did not requireNONMET a grant .
Yet the Chelsea manager , Bobby Campbell , and Arsenal assistant , Theo Foley , agreedNONMET it had been a good match , and the spectators ' complaints were muted .
Some even applaudedNONMET the players at the end .
It takesMET all sorts .
Bobby Robson was there to assessMET World Cup candidates , but nothing positive emergedMET from 90 minutes of scufflingMET that madeMET one almost yearnNONMET for the more measured boredom of Rangers ' European Cup exit in Munich three days earlier .
At least the outcome was appropriate .
Had either of the teams won , they would have takenMET the League leadership .
Instead Liverpool stayedMET top without kickingNONMET a ball .
Television had postponedMET Manchester United's scheduled visit to Anfield so it could be shownNONMET live on 22 December , the longest night .
London's leading pair , as if piquedMET by this , turnedMET 30 September into the longest afternoon .
On and on it draggedMET .
LackingNONMET a goal that might have alteredNONMET its chemistry , it remainedNONMET a matter of dull physics .
Yet many of the crowd were keptMET interested by the possibility of victory , which is , I supposeNONMET , what derbies are about .
They are so frequent these days in London , which has eight of 20 First Division clubs , that we must expectNONMET aesthetic considerations to be overriddenNONMET .
Why , though , could these supposed championship contenders not have triedNONMET to emulateNONMET the fine passing that had sprinkledMET the previous weekend's Merseyside joust ?
The simple answer is that Chelsea are in a false position and Arsenal , on this evidence , slightly jaded champions .
They ought to have pocketedMET three points in the first half but Tony Adams , a more threatening centre-forward on his forays than the current Alan Smith , missedNONMET the target with two headers and David Rocastle letNONMET Dave Beasant saveMET a penalty , much as the stretch keeper had done for Wimbledon in the 1988 FA Cup final .
Now an Arsenal team in peak health would have keptMET a grip on the match .
This one could not .
As George Graham indicatedMET upon his side's accession to the title , they would needNONMET more composure and sophistication to matchNONMET Liverpool in the longer term .
He choseNONMET not to hastenNONMET the process by buyingNONMET .
After all , he had just the man on his staff .
But Paul Davis remainsNONMET unfit .
His absence is increasingly conspicuous and Liverpool , for the moment , in a super league of one .
Davis , of course , would have walkedMET into England's team in Poland a week on Wednesday ; until last season's prolonged suspension , followedMET by injury , Bobby Robson had him firmly pencilled in as Bryan Robson's replacement .
Michael Thomas , several years younger , is not quite in the same class yet but may have to playNONMET in Chorzow .
If so , it will be a gamble , because he floppedMET on his only previous international appearance in Saudi Arabia .
The odds are favourable enough according to Chelsea's Mike Hazard , who saidNONMET of his adversary : ‘ He could copeNONMET in Poland , not just because of his ability to closeMET people down and useNONMET the ball well , but temperament — you sawMET when he scoredNONMET the goal that wonMET Arsenal the League .
’ Very kind , but international players are supposed to be habitually influential , and it was Hazard who in the second half , with a few incisive passes , gifts from the heavens on a day like this , leftMET a greater mark .
Chelsea might have wonMET had the ball not keptMET turningMET into a Mexican bean at Kerry Dixon's feet .
Campbell's hard-working side are still tryingMET to sortMET out their system , which involvesNONMET a spare defender and , as far as one can seeMET , a good deal of improvisation .
It should suitMET Tony Dorigo , the unblooded England left- back , though oddly his rival , Nigel Winterburn , did more rampaging on Saturday ; neither , in truth , madeMET the heart pound .
Dorigo at least had the satisfaction of seeingNONMET his direct opponent and England colleague David Rocastle withdrawnMET .
All in all , Bobby Robson must have foundMET it about as fruitful as a day tryingNONMET to getMET in touch with Brian Clough .
There was , however , one aspect that deservesMET commendation .
After 16 minutes Graham Roberts was injuredNONMET by a tackle for which Perry Groves was booked ( Steve Clarke tookNONMET over as sweeper , and is likely to have several weeks in which to buildMET on a promising display ) .
Roberts's ankle appearedNONMET broken , but the Chelsea players were not interested in retribution and the club , as soon as they knewMET the injury was less serious , putMET a message on the electronic scoreboard : an example of public relations from which others could learnNONMET .
Pope rejectsNONMET Runcie's vision of church leadership From ANDREW BROWN , Religious Affairs Correspondent , in Rome THE ARCHBISHOP of Canterbury , Dr Robert Runcie , exchangedMET a symbolic kiss of peace with Pope John Paul II yesterday at a mass attendedNONMET by thousands in St Peter's Square , Rome .
But Dr Runcie's ideas of a limited primacy — recognisingNONMET the Pope as a central figure in the Christian Church , who would exerciseMET ‘ a primacy for the sake of unity and mission ’ — have been rejectedNONMET as insufficient by the Pope .
They have also arousedMET Protestant anger against Dr Runcie , at the same time as he has becomeNONMET involved in a row over his attack on the ‘ Pharisees ’ of British society .
Though Dr Runcie and his party could not takeMET Holy Communion at the papal mass , he had earlier celebratedNONMET the eucharist at the Anglican church in Rome after three demonstrators roseNONMET from the congregation as he ascendedNONMET the pulpit ; the visit has been doggedMET by protests from supporters of the Rev Ian Paisley .
In his sermon , Dr Runcie saidNONMET : ‘ We should ever recogniseNONMET the scandal that Anglicans and Roman Catholics must celebrateNONMET two eucharists to makeMET one memorial of our redemption on the day of our Lord .
’ Dr Runcie has goneMET out of his way on this visit to concedeNONMET many of the doctrinal points and practices which large elements of the Church of England have traditionally foundMET offensive in Roman Catholicism .
The Pope , too , has spokenNONMET warmly of unity .
On Saturday the two prelates attendedNONMET a service of vespers at the Church of San Gregorio , which standsMET on the site where Pope Gregory sentNONMET St Augustine of Canterbury off to becomeNONMET the first Archbishop of Canterbury in 597 .
But in their prepared homilies the Pope and the Archbishop addressedMET quite different problems .
Dr Runcie repeatedNONMET his offer of a limited primacy , involvingNONMET the limited powers exercisedMET by the popes in the first few centuries of the Christian Church .
However , the Pope's account of the role of the papacy wentMET a great deal farther than that : Christian unity , he saidNONMET , must be foundedMET on the faith in Christ that was handedMET on by the Apostles ; what this faith is must be determinedNONMET by the Roman Catholic Church .
He quotedNONMET the Second Vatican Council : ‘ The task of givingMET an authentic interpretation of the Word of God … has been entrustedNONMET to the living teachting office of the Church alone .
The specific role of bishops which is to be exercisedMET in communion with the seeMET of Peter in ensuringNONMET the unity and continuity of the faith is vital if we are to hand on the faith of Peter , Gregory and Augustine .
All our efforts to restoreMET unity among Christians will be in vain if they are not carried out in total fidelity to the faith in Christ … handedMET on by the Apostles .
’ In a statement afterwards Dr Runcie stressedMET that he was not proposingNONMET any change in the British constitution .
‘ The phrase ‘ universal primacy ’ has a spiritual meaning .
It does not implyNONMET political supremacy , and does not suggestNONMET that the Pope should administerNONMET the affairs of the Church of England , ’ he saidNONMET .
Both prelates referred to the consecration in February of the Rt Rev Barbara Harris as the Anglican Assistant Bishop of Massachussetts .
Bishop Harris is quite unacceptable to the Vatican .
The Pope saidNONMET : ‘ Events in recent years have seriously aggravatedMET the differences between us .
’ The Independent has learntMET that 1,800 American Roman Catholic nuns wroteNONMET last winter to Dr Runcie , urgingNONMET him to defyNONMET the Pope over the ordination of women .
Sister Margaret Traxler , of the National Coalition of American Nuns , saidNONMET that she had toldNONMET Dr Runcie : ‘ The Roman Catholic Church saysMET this is a deterrent to unity ; but we sayNONMET , how can this be a deterrent to unity when discrimination against women is evil ?
’ She saidNONMET she had receivedNONMET a ‘ friendly and brotherly ’ reply from Dr Runcie .
Labour ‘ would keepMET tight rein on spending ’ By ANTHONY BEVINS , Political Editor JOHN SMITH , the shadow Chancellor , yesterday setMET the overriding tone for this week's Labour Party conference with a warning that he would imposeNONMET tough spending controls if Labour wonMET the next election .
His warning casts doubt on Labour's commitment to increaseNONMET spending on ‘ priority ’ programmes for the health service and pensions .
Mr Smith saidNONMET in an interview on BBC television's On the Record that he did not expectNONMET his colleagues to ‘ spendNONMET and spendNONMET again'NONMET when they tookMET office .
He concededNONMET that there would be disputes with colleagues , but saidNONMET : ‘ There are no quick fixes , and I will not be indulgingNONMET in any quick fix .
A quick fix clearly becomesNONMET unfixed .
There are realities that I can not changeMET .
There will be the reality of the economic situation which we inheritMET , which will not be our fault , but it will be our responsibility .
When we've gotMET an economic mess , the first duty of a government is to clearMET up the economic mess .
‘ Now if that meansMET we have to postponeNONMET some of our social ambitions , then we may have to do so .
But it will not meanMET that we are abandoningMET them .
We will tackleMET puttingMET our economy in order so that we can achieveNONMET that social ambition , so that the strong economy is usedNONMET to financeNONMET and developNONMET the fair society .
’ As for his colleagues , Mr Smith saidNONMET : ‘ We're all agreedNONMET that we can not spendNONMET what we have not earnedNONMET and we intendNONMET to earnNONMET it before we spendNONMET it .
That will be the guiding light of the next Labour government .
When I insistNONMET on that priority , as I can tellNONMET you I most certainly will — with the full support of the Prime Minister in doing so — then I'm sure my colleagues will seeMET the point of that .
‘ Now it is quite right of them , of course , to allowNONMET our social obligations not to be forgottenNONMET ; there'll probably be an argument .
There are in all governments between the Treasury and spending ministers .
But they will takeMET into account the need for that balance that saysMET that social spending without underpinningMET by economic growth will not be sustainedMET in any event .
’ Mr Smith's warning coincidedNONMET with a call by Ken Livingstone , the Labour MP for Brent East , who saidNONMET on London Weekend Television's The Walden Interview : ‘ You can be miles ahead in the polls , but when you getMET to the last three weeks , people thinkNONMET , ‘ Can I affordMET a Labour government ?
’ We needNONMET to sayNONMET now what we are goingNONMET to spendNONMET : where the money is goingMET to comeMET from .
’ Mr Livingstone called for cuts in defence spending .
David Blunkett , another member of the national executive , toldNONMET a conference fringe rally organisedMET by the soft Labour Coordinating Committee that Labour would have to findNONMET additional funds for its social programme by cuttingMET £9.5bn from defence spending over five years , and raisingMET the level of taxation on the rich .
The policy review's top rate of income tax - 50 per cent — was too low , he saidNONMET .
Although the policy review will be endorsedMET by the conference , givingMET Neil Kinnock the freedom to goMET on to the offensive against the Conservatives in the run-up to the next general election , there are a number of areas of potential conflict .
Calls for consideration of electoral reform and a new form of black representation are both expected to be defeatedMET .
Ron Todd , the general secretary of the transport workers ' union , saidNONMET that today's vote on the multilaterist nuclear defence policy would not yieldMET the ‘ massive and overwhelming ’ majority predictedNONMET by right- wingers , and he warnedNONMET that party leaders could not expectNONMET everybody to ‘ goose-step ’ in the same direction once the policy had been carriedMET .
The conference opened with Labour buoyedMET by a series of weekend opinion polls givingMET leads of from 5 to 12 points .
An atmosphere poisonedMET by mistrust By NICHOLAS ROE The disposal of toxic wastes is one of the most intractable problems facingMET industrialised societies .
Even though some of the most dangerous and persistent toxins , including polychlorinated biphenyls , PCBs , are no longer manufactured , quantities of them still existNONMET , and must be gotMET rid                  of .
But how ?
And where ?
On this page , Nick Roe visitsNONMET a plant which , despite strenuous public relations efforts , has failedMET to convinceMET its neighbours that it has comeMET clean .
And Richard North looksMET at current provisions for the destruction of PCBs , and at the history of British involvement in a rather uncomfortable growth industry The security guard at the entrance to one of Britain's mightiest hazardous waste disposal plants pressedNONMET a button and the gate openedNONMET .
Then he pressedNONMET another knob and a big toy doll in his office window droppedMET its trousers .
You had to laughNONMET .
Yet this was Rechem International's high incineration plant at Pontypool in Gwent , South Wales .
Hardly a laughing matter , surely ?
Beyond the barrier layMET some of the most toxic chemicals knownNONMET , awaitingMET destruction by fire .
What else ?
A vast , smoke-blackened furnace ; 100 people to do the work ; massive investment — the company spentMET £2m last year on cleaning up smoke emissions .
Plus a backdrop of houses coveringMET the valley walls on either side , a reminder that wherever industrialised societies decideMET to dealMET with their most intractable problems , they are unlikely to findMET a place to do so which is not in somebody's back yard .
Britain grindsMET out almost five million tonnes of hazardous waste each year , of which about 63,000 tonnes are so difficult to storeNONMET or treatNONMET that they are burntNONMET at high temperatures here in Gwent or at one of three other centres : Ellesmere Port ; Fawley , near Southampton ; and the unfortunately namedNONMET Killamarsh , near Sheffield .
Five more incinerators currently proposedNONMET in various parts of the country will double capacity .
Then there are the imports : 83,000 tonnes of toxic waste enter British ports annually for incineration or other treatment , a figure  which has increasedNONMET 20-fold in just eight years .
In these environmentally conscious times , this is an uncomfortable growth industry .
Liverpool dockers recently turned back parts of a 1,500-tonne consignment of Canadian PCBs ( polychlorinated biphenyls ) bound for this plant in Gwent .
In doing so , they underlinedMET a fact which is likely to attractMET more and more attention as tankers continueNONMET to shiftNONMET toxins from town to town , country to country : the waste chain is long .
It snakes in and out of ports , along our busiest highways and through our most crowded cities .
Anxieties which are currently feltMET most acutely by those living near destruction plants themselves may not always remainNONMET so localised .
At Pontypool , the collision between a precise , scientific industry and a diffuse , unscientific local suspicion is painfully apparent .
Local people mutter and march , makeMET speeches and throw things ; staff face sarcasm in nearby pubs ; and for years there have been demands for a public inquiry .
Rechem has respondedMET with a rather desperate open-door policy aimed at soothing fears , and more recently by issuing about a dozen writs against the fiercest critics .
‘ We are an aggressive company , ’ admittedMET David Wheeler , operations director at this plant and at Rechem's other incinerator , at Fawley .
For a place so hatedNONMET , the Pontypool plant looksNONMET innocuous inside , like a cross between an oil refinery and a crematorium .
Mr Wheeler , an engineer who workedNONMET for many years in the oil business , is a pleasant , slightly worried-looking man who can not bearMET the fact that no one seemsNONMET to realiseNONMET just what lengths he goesMET to in order to keepMET the plant squeaky clean and emission- free .
In hard hats and protective glasses , we walkedNONMET past the huge ‘ fume cupboard ’ where the most noxious barrels are openedNONMET , and arrived at the vast , closed mouth of the furnace itself .
It was hot , but not burning .
There was a fault on the computer governingNONMET the plant , saidNONMET Mr Wheeler , and the fire had automatically shutMET down .
These pipes stretchingMET thinly in a bridge across the service road injectedMET a mix of chemicals into the walls of the furnace itself ; did I knowNONMET that fuel was only usedNONMET in the start-up process , after which the chemicals themselves provided the fire ?
Workers in blue overalls driftedMET around us and cracked jokes in gentle Welsh accents .
In the furnace control office I foundNONMET shift foreman Keith Thomas and askedNONMET innocently if he had any physical problems : ‘ Not since my vasectomy .
’ A grin .
He livedNONMET locally , so how did neighbours viewMET his job here ?
‘ You getMET sarcasm mainly .
A lot of my friends are pleased that the company is doing the job they are doing .
Others are not so well informed .
You couldn't hopeNONMET to convertMET them .
’ At a nearby house , Leonard Hough , a retired schoolmaster , had earlier toldNONMET me about ‘ the fog ’ which he saysNONMET comesMET from the factory .
‘ It blowsMET along the valley .
They've improvedNONMET the chimney recently and it's very much better than it was but we still getMET the smells .
And since they've refusedNONMET repeatedly to have a public inquiry into what is goingMET on there we're not certain of the safety of what's comingMET out .
We getMET smoke from the steel works across the valley , but we knowNONMET what that is and we're not afraid of it .
’ Keith Thomas pressedNONMET a button and a huge door clankedNONMET upwards so that I could peerNONMET into the heart of the furnace .
Piles of ruddy-brown ash layMET heaped on the floor .
Pumps sucked air inwards .
Heat shone out .
In here , they burnNONMET about 30,000 tonnes of chemicals a year , a quarter originatingNONMET outside Britain .
The waste arrives at the rate of up to seven tanker-loads every day — that is seven lorries passingNONMET thousands of doorsteps .
Right here , in this gaping mouth , liesMET the end of the chain .
The wastes includeNONMET lindane , DDT , out-of-date drugs , carcinogenic chemicals , old cigars and even pornography ( a different kind of pollution ) .
About 7,000 tonnes of the total waste is PCB-contaminated .
PCBs are so difficult to destroyNONMET , that Rechem's emission-monitoring systems are gearedNONMET to detectingNONMET them on the grounds that if you destroyNONMET PCBs you destroyNONMET everything .
This , of course , is a key point .
If you did not burnNONMET chemicals like PCBs , what else would you do with them ?
The sea ?
The earth ?
‘ We are not in the business of pollutingNONMET the environment , ’ Mr Wheeler insistedNONMET .
‘ We are on the side of the angels .
’ Environmental organisations , however , putMET the emphasis elsewhere .
‘ There is no incinerator which completely destroysNONMET toxic wastes , ’ Madeleine Cobbing , Greenpeace's toxics campaigner , toldNONMET me .
‘ The crux of our argument is that we don't needNONMET to have toxic wastes and the fact that plants like Rechem existNONMET , providingNONMET easy options for companies , is actingMET as a disincentive for companies to cleanMET up .
’ But — another but — what about the PCBs that already existNONMET ?
Although they are no longer manufactured , they are still present , for example in electrical equipment .
No one could therefore callMET for the closure of incineration plants at a stroke , because noxious chemicals have to goMET somewhere .
So a part of the argument switches to the kind of incinerators you allowNONMET while industry is forcedMET to cleanMET itself up .
Also , how these should functionNONMET and — perhaps most important of all — where you putNONMET them .
Mr Wheeler , now movingNONMET to the rear of the plant to show off the £2m smoke-cleaning section , which had just broken down , pointedMET out that his company achievedMET destruction of at least 99.9999 per cent of all materials .
The company's figures implyNONMET that when you have burntNONMET 99.9999 per cent of a 30,000-tonne annual throughput , a figure of 0.03 of a tonne remainsMET .
In 1986 , according to Friends of the Earth , a survey of the homes clusteredNONMET on the surrounding hills foundMET that three-quarters of 800 residents were opposed to the Rechem plant .
‘ The plant should be relocatedNONMET because it's in the wrong place , ’ Llew Smith , the local Euro-MP , toldNONMET me .
‘ It is in a valley and in a highly populated area .
’ What did Mr Wheeler makeMET of that ?
‘ If we do it properly any spot is the right spot , ’ he insistedNONMET .
Stack emissions of PCBs were below the American standard for breathingNONMET air - 1,000 times lower than the British equivalent .
Regular soil and grass tests showedMET no difference between PCB contamination in the immediate area and elsewhere in Wales — though there are no established ‘ safe ’ levels for these .
Five air-monitoring plants had been installed ( he tookNONMET me to seeNONMET them ) .
And here were drums of chemicals , each labelled , each with a job number to checkNONMET against sampling .
And yet there are accidents .
In 1987 , aluminium meltedNONMET in the furnace , reactedMET with water and explodedNONMET , sendingMET a black cloud over nearby houses .
Later , drums supposedly containingNONMET carcinogenic drugs were not openedNONMET for checkingNONMET before burningNONMET ( for health reasons ) and three were ‘ misdescribed ’ .
They , too , reactedNONMET with water , and a plant operator was burnedNONMET by a cloud of acid gas .
We walkedNONMET past a tanker where a huge man namedNONMET Andy Matthews was pumpingNONMET vinyl acetate into a 10,000-gallon vat , wreathed in its sweet , sickly smell : ‘ I've been here two years , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ My father was an industrial chemist and he saidNONMET if you wantNONMET to goNONMET and workNONMET for them , goNONMET and workNONMET for them .
’ Were there any spillages ?
He shruggedNONMET .
‘ Nothing major .
I might dropNONMET a pipe — a little bit of a splash .
’ In a large , prefabricated shed we wanderedNONMET past stacks of 45-gallon drums of PCBs , two drums high , about 10 deep ; and there were contaminated transformers waitingMET to be cutMET up and roasted in the flames .
Back along the waste chain , the Liverpool dockers who objectedNONMET to the import of exactly this type of chemical should be aware that PCBs are movingMET about our roads all the time .
There was no difference between the liquid in these drums and the liquid in the cargoes they refusedNONMET to touchNONMET .
In Liverpool , a dockers ' spokesman with the Transport and General Workers Union admittedNONMET : ‘ Drivers aren't happy handling some of these commodities , but at least a lorry-driver has more idea of what he is handling than a docker , who could have a consignment and just not knowNONMET what it is .
’ Yet he did not opposeNONMET all toxic waste movement ( after all , the same union representsNONMET workers at Rechem itself ) ; he simply didn't likeNONMET the idea that big industrial nations like Canada could dumpMET their dirty problems on this country and his members .
DrivingNONMET away , I noticedNONMET that the vast chimney was still not functioningNONMET , but when I calledMET at a neighbouring house a woman showedNONMET me videos she had takenMET of smoke comingMET from the plant , settlingMET in her garden .
Certainly the incinerator seemsNONMET well controlledNONMET .
Certainly there is no scientific evidence that living nearby increasesNONMET the risk of sickness .
Certainly , Mr Wheeler convincedNONMET me that his company was goingMET to huge lengths to keepMET itself clean .
‘ We must runMET it safely in the short term and long term , ’ he saidNONMET , ‘ because if people are able to demonstrateNONMET that we are causingNONMET an environment problem we will be shutMET down .
’ In April 1985 a tanker spilledMET 200 litres of PCBs over the main Trans-Canada Highway on the border between Ontario and Manitoba .
A section of the road was shutMET for a week and motorists were warnedNONMET to cleanNONMET their cars and to disposeNONMET of the rags in plastic bags .
Health Update : CrackNONMET connection with Aids By OLIVIA TIMBS THERE is much concern in the US about the addiction to ‘ crackNONMET ’ ( purified cocaine ) within inner-city communities .
Doctors are worried that women turningMET to prostitution to financeNONMET the habit are at risk of contracting Aids .
This problem has spreadMET to the UK .
In the past two months , doctors at the Regional Addiction Treatment Unit in Birmingham have comeMET across five patients addictedNONMET to crackNONMET .
Three are prostitutes introducedMET to the drug by pimps .
According to them , crack is widely available in Birmingham and most prostitutes they knowNONMET use it daily .
The doctors pointMET out in the British Medical Journal that , though crack dependency is not a direct risk  factor for Aids , prostitutes ‘ tryingNONMET to maintainMET expensive crack habits may be temptedNONMET into unsafe sex practices … which in turn may leadMET to an increase in the spread of Aids ’ .
Health Update : Zinc deficiency in pregnancy By OLIVIA TIMBS FADS for vitamin supplements have been overtakenMET by a vogue for minerals and trace elements .
Zinc is the latest : lack of it supposedly causesNONMET a range of problems , although little scientific evidence supportsMET the link .
But some reports have suggestedMET that low zinc levels may leadMET to problems in pregnancy , from difficult labour to congenital malformations in children .
There is stronger evidence that a zinc deficiency may causeNONMET the foetus to growNONMET slowly in the womb .
Doctors in Bristol decidedNONMET to testNONMET the theory .
In a study of nearly 500 women , they foundMET that zinc supplements did not improveNONMET either foetal health or reduceMET the number of pre-term labours .
The doctors concludeNONMET in the British Medical Journal that there would be little benefit if all women in the UK were given zinc supplements during pregnancy .
They recogniseMET , however , that the women in their study were largely middle-class , who might well  have sufficiently large zinc stores because they were well nourishedNONMET .
Further studies , the researchers believeNONMET , should concentrateMET on pregnant women knownNONMET to have a zinc deficiency or to be at risk from problems during labour .
Health : Alternative cures ‘ not proven ’ By OLIVIA TIMBS RENEE HENRY underwentNONMET a lumpectomy and radiotherapy for her breast cancer .
Dr Maurice Slevin , a consultant physician at the department of medical oncology at St Bartholomew's Hospital , London , saidNONMET the chances of a woman being alive and well four years after such treatment were at least 75 per cent .
Mrs Henry refusedNONMET the drug treatment givenMET to reduceMET the chances of a relapse , but there are many who would remainNONMET well without it , Dr Slevin saidNONMET .
Part of the attraction of alternative cancer treatments such as the Gerson therapy is that they allowMET a patient to feelMET more in control of the treatment .
Dr Slevin agreedNONMET that this is often beneficial , but is concerned about other aspects of such therapies .
Very few have been evaluatedNONMET , and the evidence is largely anecdotal , he saidNONMET .
Some of the treatments have dramatic side-effects .
‘ If they do workMET , that is wonderful — but we have no way of knowingNONMET for sure .
There have been no controlled trials of the Gerson therapy .
‘ If one of my patients wantsNONMET to give up a potentially curative treatment in favour of an alternative therapy , then I will tryNONMET to dissuadeNONMET them .
But it is essentially up to the patient .
’ He saidNONMET the NHS should addressMET itself more to the needs of cancer patients so that they do not feelMET they have to goMET outside the system .
They should be offered relaxation therapy and stress management , and advice on diet and exercise , he saidNONMET .
The Imperial Cancer Research Fund and the Cancer Research Campaign are conductingMET a joint study of the Bristol Cancer Help Centre , which offersMET a holistic programme — dietary advice and  emotional counselling — to complementNONMET medical treatment .
Media : Return of the six-gun saga : Modern actors can not rideNONMET and young viewers do not understandNONMET the cowboy code , but a revival of the western looms on the horizon , John Lichfield saysNONMET By JOHN LICHFIELD Where are the TV westerns of yesteryear ?
What happenedNONMET to Ben Cartwright , Hoss and Little Joe ?
Where is the Wagon Train that seemedNONMET permanently to be circlingNONMET its wagons waitingMET for a drunken pioneer's wife to have twins in the last of them ?
The TV western seemedNONMET to fadeMET into the sunset some time in the mid-1970s , victim of a narcissistic age that preferredMET to lookMET at prosperous , smart-alecky or violent images of itself ( Dallas , Cheers , Miami Vice ) .
It was a time when children were encouragedNONMET to fantasizeNONMET about machines and outer space rather than marvelNONMET at the open spaces where the deer and buffalo roamed .
Now , however , it seemsNONMET , the wheel has turnedMET full circle .
The western is being revivedMET , reinterpretedMET for the 1990s .
One of the most successful Hollywood TV producers , David Jacobs , the creator of Dallas , believesNONMET the western also fell victim to late 1960s iconoclasm .
‘ The John Wayne stereotype was rejectedNONMET , along with his conservative values , ’ he saidNONMET .
A series of spoof or obsessively realistic 1960s westerns ( Cat Balou , Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid , Soldier Blue , The Wild Bunch ) strippedMET the mask from the Lone Ranger's face .
The legend could not be takenMET seriously any longer in what had been , admittedly , a threadbare form .
Howard Rosenberg , TV critic of the Los Angeles Times , saidNONMET : ‘ Just look at the re-runs of the old western series .
You had heroes scotch-taped to their horses and lightly sprinkledNONMET with dust .
You can't getMET away with that any more .
’ John Mantley , producer of Gunsmoke for CBS for 11 years , saysNONMET elements of the old story beganNONMET to fallMET apart .
‘ We all readNONMET Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee .
We knewNONMET that the US Government had signedMET 453 treaties with the Indians and brokenMET every one .
A part of the myth just didn't workMET after that .
’ At their peak in the mid-60s , there were 39 western series on the three American TV networks — almost two a day on each channel .
In the US weekly audience ratings in 1965 , there were three westerns in the top five , and seven in the top 10 .
By the mid-80s they had all goneMET the way of the buffalo : extinct save for preservation in the national park of permanent re-runs .
Gene Autry , the first TV cowboy , now 82 , saysNONMET westerns dominatedMET the early days of TV partly because they had lively , cheaply producedNONMET visuals , but mainly because early TV was starved of feature films by the studios .
Westerns were a handy substitute .
There are encouraging signs , however , that the TV western is struggling back into the saddle .
Paradise , launched on CBS last season and shownMET on BBC1 this summer , was the first new western serial for a decade .
It was the only new drama series in US network TV to be allowedMET a second series this year , despite a relatively lowly 49th ranking in the ratings .
Its creator and executive producer is , perhaps surprisingly , David Jacobs .
Why did he followMET J R Ewing , the epitome of 1980s TV , with a western about a gunfighter turned foster father ?
‘ I believedNONMET the genre was still an important and powerful one .
It's something I've always had an affection for .
I foundMET it was possible with Paradise to talkMET about individual and personal responsibility , something which if setMET in a contemporary context would have had a preachy feel about it .
’ Lonesome Dove , a five-part story of a Texas-to-Montana cattle drive , also shownNONMET on CBS last year , was the best-watched TV mini-series of any kind in America for five years .
It wonMET substantial critical acclaim and will showNONMET in Britain next year .
The 1989-90 season , which startedNONMET this month , broughtMET another new prime-time western series , ABC's Young Riders , which tellsMET the story of the Pony Express .
It also saysMET a lot about modern American TV .
Because the networks believeMET westerns appealMET mainly to middle-aged men , Young Riders has a cast of five pouting young male actors , in an attempt to makeMET a western with ‘ good demographics ’ .
The effect is rather like an extended advertisement for Marlboro Lights .
Westerns are no longer a cheap option .
The classic western TV series were filmedNONMET in back-lots , or in the semi-desert 20 miles from Los Angeles .
Modern audiences no longer acceptNONMET plastic bushes , and the southern Californian suburban sprawl meansNONMET the production companies have to takeMET their horses and cows to locations far away in Arizona or Montana .
David Jacobs also pointsMET out that the cost of hiringNONMET a stage-coach is now prohibitive .
‘ At one time there were dozens of companies which specialisedNONMET in renting out western paraphernalia .
Now there are maybe two .
The cost has goneMET through the barn roof .
’ And actors can no longer rideNONMET .
They have to be sent to ‘ cowboy school ’ .
Westerns , by their nature , demandMET more time on location .
As a result , Mr Jacobs saysNONMET , it costNONMET nearly as much to makeMET an episode of Paradise , with relatively unknown actors , as an episode of Dallas , with its big stars .
Will the western ride again ?
John Mantley is cautious .
‘ Westerns have a gladiatorial , timeless quality .
On the other hand you have a whole generation of TV watchers that doesn't really knowNONMET the rules .
A western is like a Japanese Noh play .
It is a stylised drama with understated dialogue that dependsNONMET on recognition of key words and concepts .
Many of the young people today haven't the first idea of what's goingMET on .
’ In the inert 1950s the western represented a troubled , adventurous American past .
In the anxious and eventful late 1980s and 1990s , they may comeMET to representNONMET , like All Creatures Great and Small in Britain , a less confusing past with simpler , deeper values .
Maybe .
On the other hand The Young Riders cameMET 51st in the ratings in its first week , trailingMET far , far behind all the modern myths about modern times such as The Cosby Show , Roseanne , Golden Girls , Cheers and Matlock .
It is premature , then , to sayNONMET that the western has gallopedMET back to centre screen .
But there is a puff of dust on the horizon .
Law : Always takeNONMET along a friend to sueNONMET : Litigation can pay off even in the unlikeliest circumstances .
Stephen Gold explainsNONMET By STEPHEN GOLD WHEN things goNONMET wrong you can sueNONMET more often than you may thinkNONMET .
Money may not have changedMET hands .
Someone may have even done you a favour .
It doesn't matterNONMET .
As long as you can showMET that they owedNONMET you a legal duty to be careful and have been negligent , damages could comeMET your way .
There are a number of points to bearMET in mind .
Take up references before givingMET credit , lendingNONMET money , letting in tenants , taking on staff .
AskMET banks , building societies , former landlords , present and past employers .
If you relyNONMET to your detriment on a misleading reference which was givenMET negligently , you should be able to sueNONMET the referee .
The subject of a bad reference can sueNONMET the referee for libel but has to showMET the referee was up to no good : spite , ill or some improper motive will do .
TakeNONMET along a prosperous adviser on all shopping sprees , demonstrateNONMET a high degree of trust and strong reliance in what they sayNONMET and you may have unexpected protection should the seller goNONMET out of business and the goods fallMET to pieces .
A 26-year-old woman accountant who knewNONMET nothing about the mechanical side of vehicles askedNONMET her more knowledgeable friend to findNONMET a car for her .
She stipulatedNONMET that it must never have been involved in an accident .
The friend foundNONMET one at a garage .
Although he failedNONMET to checkNONMET it had been accident-free , he assuredNONMET the lady that this was the case .
She boughtMET it .
It had been in an accident and it was worthless .
In May last year the Court of Appeal upheldNONMET a judgment against the friend for more than £5,500 damages for negligence because he had owedNONMET the accountant a duty of care .
Your conservatory collapses as a result of negligence of the professionals who were engagedNONMET by the previous owner to put it up .
You can sueNONMET the professionals — builders , architects , surveyors or engineers — by courtesy of the Defective Premises Act 1972 , despite the fact that you never had a contract with them yourself .
There are strict time limits : generally , six years from when damage first occurredMET ; where the damage was initially ‘ latent ’ you are givenMET longer — three years from when you could have discoveredNONMET it , with a long stop of 15 years .
It may also be possible to claimNONMET damages against a local authority for negligently failingMET to ensureNONMET that construction work compliedMET with the relevant building regulations .
A solicitor failsNONMET to draw up a will within a reasonable time for a client who subsequently diesNONMET .
You loseMET the gift which the will would have madeMET .
You can sueNONMET the solicitor for what you would have collectedMET , had he done his job properly , because the law reckonsMET he owedNONMET you , as well as his client , a duty of care .
When you wantNONMET to borrowNONMET on a mortgage , the prospective lenders will have the property valued at your expense .
There is no contract between you and the valuer .
But if the valuer is negligent and you buyNONMET the property relyingNONMET on his report , you may still be able to sueNONMET him for damages .
This is what the House of Lords decided in two cases last April in spite of an attempt to getMET the valuers off the hook by a disclaimer which saidMET : ‘ I acceptNONMET that the valuer does not warrantNONMET anything stated in his report as being accurate … ‘ Alas , disclaimers may workMET if , for example , the property being valuedNONMET is industrial or an expensive house .
Disclaimers may also be usedNONMET by referees and others to robMET you of a claim for damages .
Whoever attempts to hideMET behind a disclaimer must proveNONMET it is fair and reasonable to do so .
But a disclaimer can never takeMET away your rights under the Defective Premises Act 1972 for the collapsing conservatory or preventNONMET anyone being suedNONMET for negligence which has causedNONMET death or injury .
Have we yet reachedMET the point at which we would be awardedNONMET damages against the Meteorological Office because we wentNONMET campingNONMET on the day of an unforecast hurricane ?
Or after we followedNONMET the duff advice of a legal journalist in a newspaper ?
Mercifully , we doubtNONMET it !
BOOK REVIEW / The cause without a rebel : ‘ The Pale Companion ’ — Andrew Motion : Viking , 11.95 pounds By MARTIN PACEY IT WAS unfair of Auden to suggestMET , in his ‘ Letter to Lord Byron ’ , that a poet's ‘ sense of other people's very hazy ’ .
But the vaporous presences that float through this slender and anaemic first novel by a notable poet would appearNONMET to supportMET the claim .
The book — which opensMET a projected sequence of novels that will coverMET the period from 1968 to the present day — aimsMET to exploreMET what the blurb describesMET as ‘ the painful transition from youth to adulthood ’ .
This , of course , is a popular subject : it seemsNONMET particularly attractive to the poet-turned-novelist because of the scope it offersNONMET for the tremulously sensitive probing of feelings .
Sensitivity , though , is not enough .
What Andrew Motion presentsMET us with here is a static and humourless mood- piece filled with over imagery .
The hero , Francis Mayne , is suffering from the adolescent's emotional confusion and acute self-consciousness .
He findsMET it hard to communicateNONMET with people , not least his separated parents .
His father is a faceless figure : a retired brigadier , reserved and taciturn .
His mother , by contrast , is the most vividly realised character in the book : nervy , flirtatious and selfish , already on her third husband , she thinksNONMET primarily of her appearance , even when visitingNONMET her dying daughter , Francis's twin .
The first half of the novel is dominatedMET by the girl's death from leukaemia .
There is a refreshing simplicity and tenderness in Motion's account of the way Francis nursesNONMET her , but she herself is too sketchily drawnMET for the episode to carryMET much weight .
Meanwhile , at his public school , Francis is conductingMET a love-affair with an older pupil namedNONMET Keith Ogilvie .
He is finally rejectedNONMET by the devious , arrogant Keith , who informsNONMET him that he is ‘ obsolete ’ because he does not ‘ knowNONMET how to makeMET things happenNONMET ’ .
His response to this rejection is as flat as his reaction to the massive demonstration which Keith has earlier persuadedNONMET him to joinMET against the Vietnam War .
This violent event ,  described at length in hysterically colourful terms , is the only piece of history to be wovenMET convincingly into the plot .
Other broad hints as to the date are insertedMET with a comical lack of subtlety : ‘ My God , darling , have you heardNONMET ?
’ exclaimsNONMET Francis's mother one day as she greetsNONMET him , ‘ Czechoslovakia .
It's been invadedNONMET .
’ Motion will have to do better than this if he seriously intendsNONMET his series of novels to captureMET the feel of a period .
But the book's principal defect remainsNONMET the vacuity of its protagonist .
In his eagerness to depictNONMET the cloudy psychology of an adolescent , Motion has forgottenNONMET to giveMET the boy a personality .
He has , however , givenMET him a psychotic compulsion to formulateNONMET fanciful similes .
Hardly a page goesMET by without the hapless Francis noticingNONMET something which remindsNONMET him , improbably , of something else .
Sometimes he is remindedNONMET of several things .
One moment an avenue of chestnut trees looksNONMET ‘ like a child's drawing of ghosts ’ ; the next it appearsNONMET ‘ frightening but derelict , like extinguished chandeliers ’ ; and finally the chestnuts ‘ prance at him , holdingMET up their gleaming branches like hysterics .
’ Such writing rapidly palls , and I hopeNONMET that in the novels to comeMET , Motion can curbNONMET his reckless passion for it .
Motoring : A lead-free lover's guide to used cars : Drivers with a tight budget and an environmental conscience can buyNONMET second-hand without losing principles , saysNONMET James Ruppert By JAMES RUPPERT FROM this month , all new cars submitted for British type approval , the test which allowsMET them to be legally soldNONMET in the UK , must be able to runMET on lead-free petrol .
As a result of this rule , and many carefully orchestrated publicity campaigns , the motor industry's image has now changedNONMET from polluter to pal of the earth .
If you can affordNONMET an environmentally friendly G-registered runabout , then the flora , fauna and children of the British Isles will have a lot to thankNONMET you for .
But if you have a tight budget and a conscience , runningNONMET older cars on lead-free fuel becomesNONMET a much more complicated issue .
Without the presence of a lead compound , an engine's valve seats goNONMET unprotected .
This leadsMET to premature wear and plumes of blue smoke spewingMET from the exhaust .
The only effective remedy is to installNONMET hardened valve seats or a replacement cylinder head , both expensive options .
Less costly , but not entirely satisfactory , is the practice of makingMET every fourth tankful leaded petrol , which protectsNONMET the valve seats but rather defeatsMET the object .
Alternatively there are several chemical additives on the market which aimMET to provideNONMET a substitute for lead , although the case for these products has yet to be provedNONMET .
However , many cars builtNONMET within the last few years have hardenedNONMET valve seats , or alloy cylinder heads that needMET little ( simply a retune ) or no modification to useNONMET unleaded petrol .
Finding out which cars can and which can not is not difficult .
Esso filling stations have a free booklet listingMET most models producedNONMET since 1980 , as does the charity ClearNONMET ( 01-387 4970 ) , with more detail available in the Unleaded Petrol Guide ( Autodale , £2.99 ) .
LookingNONMET at those lists providesNONMET interesting reading and bears out the used-car trade's view that having a lead-only car could proveNONMET to be a liability .
It is not as if four-star leaded fuel is goingNONMET to be phased out tomorrow , but more and more buyers are askingNONMET : ‘ Does it takeMET unleaded ?
’ What is certain is that the pre-1989 Austin/MG range , all Skodas , Yugos and quite a few Lancias do not , which does not helpMET already depressed resale prices .
A 1985 Lancia Y10 ( lead only ) sellsNONMET for around £2,000 whereas the similar Fiat Uno 55 from the same year , converted to runMET on unleaded , is worth around £500 more .
A lead-only second-hand car is now worth about 10 per cent less than an unleaded equivalent .
In years to comeMET the percentage difference is likely to be much larger .
Even so , exotica such as lead-only Porsche 911s and Ferraris are unlikely to be part of this trend , so no bargains there I'm afraid .
More impressive are the Japanese manufacturers whose cars datingNONMET from the early Eighties can runMET on unleaded without adjustment .
FindNONMET a 1980 Toyota Corolla or 1982 Nissan Sunny that has not succumbedMET to rustNONMET , and you can buyNONMET with confidence .
On the home front , most Fords and Vauxhalls from at least the mid-Eighties can useNONMET unleaded .
If the ‘ greenness ’ of goingNONMET unleaded still seemsNONMET a bit of a grey area , it is possible to switchNONMET to diesel without a shadow of environmental doubt .
Diesel always has been lead-free and the only adjustments you needNONMET to makeMET are mental ones , because diesel-powered cars are no longer slow , smelly or noisy .
They also returnMET more miles to the gallon than their petrol equivalents , although service intervals are shorter .
But after the publicity on unleaded fuel there has been increased interest in used diesel power .
But rememberNONMET that these cars accrueNONMET , and can withstandNONMET , significantly higher mileages than petrol cars , 50-90,000 being the norm .
The tradition for diesel cars is far better establishedNONMET on the Continent and that is where the best buys comeMET from .
Perhaps the most successful maker is Peugeot , with a complete range of cars from the small 205 — around £3,000 for a 90,000-mile 1985 car — to the legendary 504 =estate , about £2,000 for a 1982 example .
The Germans are also fairly accomplished manufacturers , although a five-door 1980 Golf with a six-figure mileage will still costNONMET £1,500 .
Prestige comesMET in the shape of a Mercedes with the 240D or ‘ Stuttgart Taxi ’ , commanding £7,000 but returning unfailing reliability .
Even if lead levels in the atmosphere do not botherNONMET you , I am sure you will findMET the fact that unleaded petrol is 15p cheaper , and that diesel fuel boostsMET mpg by at least a third , most interesting .
Auctions : Dazzling riches of the Orient By ROGER BELL IT IS Asian Week at Sotheby's and Christie's .
They are mixingMET Islamic art from the Middle East with Indian and South-East Asian .
The sales combineMET items of charm at fairly accessible prices with some rare treasures aimed at big-time collectors .
Homely Persian pottery of the twelfth to thirteenth century combinesMET animal and bird images with sinuous plant motifs and marksMET the beginning of lustre wares ; they are mostly pricedNONMET in the £500 to £1,000 range and rate high on charm .
The Iznik pottery from Turkey dating from the fifteenth and sixteenth century explodesMET with colour on more sophisticated white grounds ; Iznik is now highly soughtNONMET after by Turkish yuppies and prices runMET from £2,000 or so to £15,000 .
Both houses combineMET elegant early metalwares ( twelfth/thirteenth century ) , bronze vessels with silver inlay — which are expensive — with nineteenth- century imitations , more flashy but in the mid-hundreds .
There are plenty of Indian miniatures , colourful and charming evocations of princely courts , pricedNONMET in hundreds or low thousands .
Stone figures chipped off the war-torn temples of Cambodia are more expensive ; a striking Khmer figure will costNONMET £20,000 or more .
There are also outstanding bits of Indian stone monuments , with gods and goddesses sensuously entwinedNONMET in spiritual embrace ; they startMET with the Gandhara grey schist carvings of the third/fourth century .
Glasgow : Clocks and scientific instruments , Wednesday 11am .
Market Harborough : Ceramics , glass , toys , silver , musical instruments and artworks , Tuesday 10am .
Prints , watercolours , oil paintings , furniture and architectural effects , Tuesday 1.30pm .
Gildings , Roman Way ( 0858 410414 ) .
Drink : Desire in search of a name : Do the French have the ‘ mot juste ’ to  describeNONMET the desire for a reviving drink ?
In the first of a monthly series , Michael Jackson huntsMET in vain By MICHAEL JACKSON THANKNONMET God it's Saturday .
I knowNONMET that today is Saturday because already I am thirsty for a dry , hoppy pint of bitter at the end of the afternoon : an aperitif to sharpenMET my appetite for this evening's Indian meal .
How did you feelMET as you cameMET to the end of your working week yesterday afternoon ?
Boy , I had a thirst .
We sayNONMET we are thirsty when we meanNONMET that we fancyNONMET a glass of wine , a pint of beer , a gin and tonic or a shot of whisky — the pleasure of namingNONMET our poison — at the end of a busy day or tiresome week .
That is not thirst .
To enjoyNONMET it , we do not needNONMET to be dry : just in need of a restorative or relaxant , or maybe a focus for a social moment or brief encounter .
We callNONMET it ‘ thirst ’ in lieu of a more accurate description .
No , not more accurate : ‘ thirst ’ is not accurate at all as a description for this apparently indescribable condition .
It is a desire millions of us knowNONMET and share , yet for which we have no name .
This desire that can not findMET its name ( though it would dareMET speakMET it , if it could ) is pleasurable .
It is as enjoyable as feeling gently hungry or amorous .
No , not amorous : randy — we have a word for that .
Any of these conditions is pleasurable so long as there is a good likelihood of satisfaction in reasonably short order .
LetNONMET puritans and pessimists damnNONMET , disapproveNONMET or dismissMET these appetites ; that is their loss .
Those of us who enjoyNONMET them needNONMET only a name for each condition , so that we may discussNONMET them in expectation and in recollection .
ComeMET to thinkNONMET of it , neither hunger nor randiness hitsMET quite the spot .
Peckishness and lust , perhaps ?
Or does that sound like a firm of country solicitors ?
This is to digressNONMET .
What of this thirst that can be satisfied by an unquenching drink ?
Wine is not quenchingMET , but no less in demand for that .
TryNONMET to quenchMET your thirst with a light , fresh white and you will drinkNONMET enough to putMET you on your back .
Beer is , quite rightly , Britain's favourite Friday night drink .
It can momentarily bluntMET a thirst , but not altogether cutMET it .
The nearest to being quenching is the ‘ white ’ beer of Berlin .
Anything with even a modest smack of hops driesMET the palate ready for the next one .
So , of course , does alcohol itself .
It may for a moment seemNONMET to quenchMET but it dehydratesNONMET , as purportedly healthy abstainers are forever tellingNONMET me .
To quenchMET is more than to refresh although our lying , lascivious eyes tellMET us the two are the same .
Does any drinkNONMET look more quenching than one of those Italian or French patent aperitifs , swirlingMET in a refractive pink or russet oiliness , clothingMET the melting ice : a Campari , Dubonnet , Lillet or ( too rare in this country ) a Picon ?
Are they quenchingMET ?
No , refreshing .
In Strasburg , they have been knownNONMET to laceMET beer with Picon , thereby ruiningNONMET both drinks ( as Queen Victoria reputedly did with claret and malt whisky ) , but still the result is not especially quenchingMET .
Perhaps a shimmering dry Martini cocktail ( minimum dilution , stirred , not shakenNONMET ; and servedNONMET straight up ) looks even more refreshing , though its effect is that of a silver mallet .
In the right place ( possibly New York , but San Francisco is better ) , the Martini is the ultimate ‘ ThankNONMET God it's Friday ’ drink .
The requirement for such pleasures is a matter of time and place , and it does not have to be Friday , Berlin or Strasburg , New York or San Francisco .
Not feelingNONMET thirsty , but fancyingNONMET a drink , has a world of moments .
Some Frenchmen startNONMET the day with a coffee and calvados .
The people of Munich callNONMET their version of Weissbier ‘ breakfast beer ’ and have it with a pair of coddled veal sausages .
New Orleans favoursMET a mid-morning milk punch , or its own variation on the gin fizz .
If the moment is before a lunch on the plane , it really ought to be a Bloody Mary .
If it is at an elegant dinner table , there is a choice between a fino sherry ( or a manzanilla ) or champagne .
None of these requiresNONMET anything even approachingMET a thirst .
Do we really ‘ washMET down ’ a good meal with claret ?
Port is immediately suggestedMET by Stilton ; cognac by coffee .
I do not fully appreciateNONMET the experience of an American late-night movie without a bourbon , or a book at bedtime without a single malt .
These are not moments of thirst … but nor are they causes of drunkenness ( unless one triesNONMET to packMET all such experiences into one day ) .
We do not drinkNONMET because we are thirsty .
Nor , if we are in civilised cast of mind , because we wishNONMET to becomeNONMET drunk .
A friend of mine saysNONMET that her body tellsMET her , without being askedMET , the season of the year .
At the end of summer , her body stopsNONMET wanting gin and tonics and suddenly desiresMET whisky .
If it were only a matter of alcohol , would a body careMET ?
People will nevertheless sayNONMET that the desire is for nothing more than alcohol .
So why not a pill or an injection ?
Because there would be no colour , no ritual , no time and place , no glorious variety .
Worst of all , there would be no aroma , taste , texture or finish .
These are sensuous pleasures at their most enjoyable when we ritualiseMET them , but how do we feelMET when we desireNONMET them ?
We , who have so many words in our language , have none for this .
But then , do the French , Spanish or Italians have a word for it ?
Perhaps they do ; maybe I have not being paying attention ; too busy with the eau-de-vieNONMET , anis or grappa .
Do the Greeks have a word for it ?
Could we borrowMET , begNONMET or inventNONMET one ?
Answers in a bottle , please .
If you are feelingMET — for lack of a better word -thirsty , let's meetMET again next month .
Same time , same place ?
It will be my turn to getNONMET them in , I thinkNONMET .
In  the Garden Update : Growing classes Weekend Garden Page 43 In the Garden Update : Weekend work From MARC CHAMPION in Washington SECATEURS are likely to be the tool most in demand now .
The summer's sprawl beginsNONMET to be oppressive at this stage in the year and trigger fingers are itchingMET to snipMET back overgrown mallows , clearMET out the mildewing foliage of golden rod and reduceNONMET the overpowering bulk of bullyboy ground cover .
KeepNONMET away from jasmine , already thick in flower bud , and clematis , however untidy .
Buddleias , although messy , should not be cut back until spring .
Dead , ragged heads of the climbing hydrangea can be removedNONMET , cuttingNONMET where the stem joinsMET the main branch .
Virginia creeper needsNONMET to be clippedNONMET back from windows and hauled out of gutters .
Mulching is a pleasant activity for October .
It can be done in spring too , but there are usually more pressing jobs then .
Shrubs such as hydrangea particularly relishMET rich rations .
It is a good time to plantNONMET hardy shrubs too .
Clematis so bristlesMET with brittle green shoots in spring that planting then is an anxiety rather than a pleasure .
Runner beans and French beans have now givenMET up completely and can be clearedNONMET off vegetable plots .
Globe artichokes are sprouting new leaves and may needNONMET protection from frost in cold areas .
Summer bedding is lookingNONMET tired and should be removedNONMET so that the ground can be cleanedNONMET and fedMET ready for spring bulbs or wallflowers .
In the Garden : PlanningMET to beatMET a leafy retreat at home : In the first of a series for novice gardeners , Anna Pavord stressesMET the value of careful forethought By ANNA PAVORD PLANTS should comeMET a long way down the list of priorities for the novice gardener .
There are many things to thinkNONMET about before even the first tentative daffodil bulb is sunkMET into the ground .
The first and most important question to mull over as you gazeNONMET at your patch is : What is this garden for ?
If you startNONMET writing down some of the responses to that question , you will findMET you have along the way acquiredNONMET a ragbag of elements that will have an important bearing on the design .
If there are small children in the equation , there will needNONMET to be a flat , soft area where they can fallNONMET off swings and climbing frames .
If you likeNONMET hanging out washingNONMET rather than dryingNONMET it in the bowels of an expensive machine , you will needNONMET to tuckNONMET away a line and makeNONMET a dry path to getNONMET to and from it .
Some novice gardeners may not wantNONMET to do much actual gardening at all , but conversely , do not wantNONMET to look out every day over a scene of threadbare grass and rotting fence .
Their ideal garden will lookNONMET good and demand little attention .
If you are a dedicated sun-worshipper , you needNONMET to markMET out the part of the garden where the sun lingersMET longest .
It may not be the part nearest the house , though this is where sittingNONMET out areas always tendNONMET to be madeNONMET .
You may , even as a novice , care so passionately about plants that all you wantNONMET is the maximum space to growNONMET them in .
Raised beds built down an unpromising alley could provideNONMET extra gardening space .
Privacy is an important consideration .
A first time garden is usually small and certainly the typical one I am imaginingNONMET for this series is no more than 40ft x 20ft and surrounded on all sides by other houses .
Privacy is a ticklish business where close neighbours are concerned .
To throw up an impenetrable Berlin Wall between you and them could be tactless .
Trellis is a useful compromise and you can always pretendNONMET it was forcedMET on you by the speed of growth of your climbing rose .
Aesthetes among the novices will by now be thoroughly irritable and complainingNONMET that gardens should have as much to do with the soul as with the necessity or not of a washing line or a barbecue pit .
So they should , and when the list of necessities is securely written down , you can askNONMET the second question : How do I wantNONMET this garden to feelMET ?
This question producesMET as variedNONMET a response as the first .
Some urban gardeners , as short of space inside as they are out , wantNONMET their gardens to be extensions of their homes , with a great deal of hard paving , good furniture and lighting .
The garden for them should feelMET like an extra sitting room , gnat-ridden perhaps , dampNONMET occasionally , but an important overflow of living space .
Closet countrysiders may wantNONMET to pretendNONMET their patch is actually a corner of some Sussex meadow and picture it swaggedMET with honeysuckle and waving with ox-eye daisies and scabious .
This is a difficult trick to bring off with suburban trains hurtlingNONMET by on one side and lorries grindingMET through their gears on the other .
A leafy retreat is an excellent goal for a small town garden , but it is best madeNONMET acknowledgingNONMET the urban setting , usingNONMET un-wild plants such as bamboo , acanthus , fig , vine , alchemilla , euphorbia , wisteria .
While you are workingNONMET through this process , takeMET note of the features in the garden that you would likeNONMET to keepNONMET .
On a new estate , there may be nothing .
In an old garden , there may be a fruit tree , or a good bulwark of evergreen laurel or box that , tidied up , could addMET a dash of venerability to the new garden that will emergeMET around it .
If you do not knowNONMET what a tree or shrub is , exercise clemency and giveMET it a year's grace to demonstrateNONMET its worth before you turnMET it over to the axeman .
The mood of the garden will dictateMET its eventual style .
It may be clippedNONMET classical , random cottage , modern high-tech , or some intensely personal vision of Byzantium , that no one has ever imagined before , but which existsNONMET in your head and wantsMET to getMET out .
Do not letNONMET anybody , particularly gardening writers , treadMET on your dreams .
All this thinking and doodling will have done nothing physically to changeNONMET the view outside the window , but it is a vital part of the gardening process .
Before you can makeNONMET , you have to knowNONMET what it is you are makingNONMET .
Property : Houses that are goingMET , goingMET , goneMET : Fed up with tryingNONMET to sellNONMET , more people are auctioningNONMET their home instead .
Andrew Bibby reports By ANDREW BIBBY IN THE small Devon town of South Molton , Julie Widlake is waitingNONMET with anticipation for Friday 20 October .
She and her boyfriend have had their future planned for some time : they wantNONMET to startNONMET farmingNONMET in a nearby village , where they also intendNONMET to buildNONMET a bungalow .
First , they have to sellNONMET their present house , a two-bedroom cottage in the centre of the town .
As is the case almost everywhere else , the market in Devon is depressed and selling has not been easy .
So instead of waitingNONMET indefinitely for a buyer , they have decidedNONMET to tryNONMET sellingNONMET their house by auction .
It comesMET under the hammer at 2.15pm on the 20th , at the Barnstaple Motel .
‘ We acceptNONMET that we might not getNONMET very much for it , but on the other hand we could getNONMET more , ’ saysNONMET Julie Widlake .
‘ We've been waitingNONMET to moveNONMET for a long time , and we needNONMET the money to buildNONMET the new house .
’ Their South Molton cottage ( guide price £44,000-£46,000 ) is one of more than 20 lots to be putMET up for sale at the Barnstaple auction by Bristol and West Property Services , and one of more than a hundred which the building society subsidiary will be auctioningNONMET in eight West Country venues over a three-day period .
Bristol and West claimsMET these auctions will helpMET to bringMET some action to an otherwise slow market , and saysMET it was overwhelmedMET by the response from people wanting to sellNONMET in this way .
Auctions certainly speed up the house-buying process .
Once the hammer has fallenMET , the successful bidder for a house must exchangeNONMET contracts immediately and payNONMET a deposit .
Completion normally takesMET place four to eight weeks later and there is no opportunity for second thoughts .
As the Bristol and West explainsMET , if a bidder does not signNONMET the contract , the auctioneer can signNONMET on their behalf .
‘ From the vendor's point of view , the house is actually soldNONMET once a successful bid is madeMET , ’ saysNONMET Graham Harrison , director of Bristol and West Property Services .
‘ Many people have  sufferedNONMET from sales falling through and from house-buying chains , and some of our vendors feelMET that now's as good a time as any to sellNONMET .
’ From the purchasers ' point of view , auctions can also be attractive — if slightly nerve-racking as you waitNONMET for biddingNONMET to startNONMET for the house of your dreams .
The problem is that normally potential purchasers have to incurNONMET the expense of undertaking surveys and arrangingMET mortgage finance , without any idea whether they will be able to affordNONMET the final selling price .
Not surprisingly , several estate agents report difficulties at the moment in attractingMET enough serious bidders .
‘ With an auction , you've gotNONMET to be certain that at least two buyers are there who can commitMET themselves , and the difficulty is that buyers who can proceedMET are few and far between , ’ saidNONMET David Phillip , a director of Yorkshire estate agents Dacre Son and Hartley .
Bristol and West hopesMET that by arrangingMET collective auctions it will be able to overcomeNONMET this problem .
It is also guaranteeingNONMET mortgages at 1 per cent below the normal interest rate , for endowment or pension- linked policies , on several of the houses up for sale , an interesting and innovative service for would-be bidders ( mortgage surveys will already have been undertakenNONMET for these houses ) .
The building society will be staffingMET a mortgage desk at each auction , and saysMET buyers could arrangeMET finance there and then , subject of course to proof of income and status .
Obviously , however , Bristol and West hopesMET to hearNONMET from interested people in advance — if only so it can gaugeMET the likely demand for each property before the auction startsNONMET .
‘ We're tryingNONMET to smoothMET the path for purchasers , and streamlineMET the system , ’ saysNONMET Graham Harrison , pointingMET out that live telephone bidding will also be available for those unable to attendNONMET .
Holiday homes and commercial property have been includedMET among the lots to be auctionedNONMET .
Although collective property auctions takeMET place regularly in London ( often primarily for investors rather than house- hunters ) , in country areas the more typical auction will be just for one house , and as likely as not will takeMET place in a nearby pub or village hall .
In fact , country auctions are often the nearest many villages getMET to liveMET theatre .
‘ The locals comeNONMET for the entertainment , and to seeNONMET who's buyingNONMET into their village , ’ observedNONMET one auction-goer .
Pub landlords are usually only too happy to provideNONMET free accommodation .
‘ It's very exciting and getsMET the adrenalin goingMET , ’ saysNONMET David Phillip , whose firm usually undertakesMET auctions in the Otley area .
Only certain types of property normally comeMET to auctionNONMET , however .
Traditionally , country cottages and houses which have unusual or unique features or are in need of a lot of renovation may be auctionedNONMET , if only because valuation is likely to be difficult .
Sometimes , too , houses have to be soldNONMET by auction to satisfyNONMET the legal requirements of trustees or executors ( auctions provideNONMET adequate proof that the property has been soldNONMET at the going market value , and protectMET trustees from future claims of negligence ) .
Less happily , but for the same reason , repossessed houses are often auctionedNONMET .
Anyone considering sellingNONMET by auction needsNONMET to be aware that the costs involvedNONMET will be higher .
Advertising costs and any expenses incurredNONMET in hiring premises are normally passed on by the estate agents to the vendor , whether or not the auction results in a sale .
In addition , agents may chargeMET slightly more commission than usual for a successful sale .
In Bristol and West's forthcoming auctions , a set fee of £375 plus VAT will be chargedMET to everyone enteringMET property to sellNONMET , with its usual agent's commission ( about 2 per cent plus VAT ) chargedMET on top when sales are madeMET .
‘ We acceptNONMET that we could loseMET the money we've paidNONMET to goMET to auctionNONMET , but that's a risk we're prepared to takeMET , ’ saysNONMET Julie Widlake .
The secret of a successful outcome dependsNONMET partly on settingMET the right reserve price , a task the auctioneer undertakesNONMET in conjunction with the seller .
Normally , the reserve is setMET only days or hours before the auction , when the agents will already have a good indication of how much interest has been shownMET .
Too high a reserve price can meanNONMET no sale , and disappointment all round .
‘ You needNONMET to understandNONMET what your clients ’ expectations are beforehand , ’ saysNONMET Graham Harrison of Bristol and West .
Agents and their clients may also have the dilemma of decidingNONMET whether to acceptNONMET any offers made prior to the auction .
Inevitably they do not always getMET it right .
Peter Crowther , managing director of a Leeds business centre , recently bought two semi-detached stone cottages in Bramhope , on the outskirts of Leeds , at an auction in the village pub .
His successful bid was for £190,000 although he had madeMET a higher prior offer which had been turnedMET down .
On the other hand , sometimes the drama of the auction and the competition between bidders can have the opposite effect .
Another recent auction in Leeds sawMET a run-down stone farmhouse without water or other amenities finally fallMET under the hammer for £330,500 .
‘ Success is by no means guaranteedNONMET at auction , ’ saysNONMET Graham Harrison .
‘ In a tough market you needNONMET to getMET the programme right , the price right and have a little bit of luck .
’ Bristol and West Property Services ( 0272 294271 ) has producedNONMET a brochure coveringMET all eight West Country auctions .
Design : Crossed lines over the toytown tram : City transport could soon be back on the right track , saysNONMET Jonathan Glancey By JONATHAN GLANCEY MODERN trams , as most continental Europeans knowNONMET , neither shake nor rattle , nor do they rollNONMET .
Sleek , solidly builtNONMET , gentle on the environment , they are often an ideal form of city transport .
They also exertMET a fascination very much of their own as they slitherMET round  circuses and brush through old city gates , flashingNONMET arcs of lightning as they switchNONMET tracks on winter nights .
Single-car , articulated or double-decker , trams are one of the most reliable and enduring forms of public transport invented .
The orange -liveried ‘ 1500 ’ series trams in Milan , for example , date from 1927 .
Eventually they will be replacedNONMET , but more than 60 years on they runMET with the rhythmic reliability of a Swiss watch .
They are as much a part of Milan as La Scala or the Galleria Vittore Emmanuele .
Last month it was announcedNONMET that Britain will getMET its first new- wave trams in 1991 .
DestinedMET to runMET in Manchester , they will relieveMET traffic congestion and help to reduceMET the levels of carbon monoxide in the city centre , outlying suburbs and satellite towns of Bury , Altrincham , Salford , Oldham and Rochdale .
In Britain , with the main exception of Blackpool ( not forgettingNONMET the single-deckers of the Isle of Man and Llandudno ) , trams had been largely relegatedNONMET to the history books .
Otherwise , the best place to seeNONMET working trams has been the tram museum at Crich in Derbyshire or else in old British Transport Commission films and Ealing comedies .
Trams disappearedNONMET from most British cities in the 1950s .
London's venerable red and cream double-deckers rumbledNONMET along the Thames embankment for the last time in 1952 .
Somehow the image of the tall , thin , mournful double-deck tram with its wooden body , slatted wooden seats and growling electric motor has stuckMET in the British mind .
Trams , it was believedNONMET until surprisingly recently , are old-fashioned .
They had something to do with fish and chips wrapped in newspaper , men in hats , National Health specs , smog and powdered egg .
They heldMET up the bright new diesel buses and , even worse , blockedMET the  progress of private motorists in bulbous Austins and lumpen Humbers in canyon like city thoroughfares .
They pickedMET up power from a spider ' s web of unsightly overhead wires .
They were inflexible in operation , draughty , and mobile reminders of TB epidemics with the enamelled ‘ Do Not Spit ’ signs screwed  to their bulkheads .
But the modern tram could hardly be more different .
It playsMET a key role in keepingMET city streets on the move and is even the object of the best modern designers ' desire .
In Milan , for example , the commission to designNONMET the new generation of ‘ Jumbo ’ trams , which wentMET into service in 1979 , was one that leading Italian architects and designers fought over .
After all , the Jumbo , a handsome and imposing articulated unit designedNONMET by architect , engineer and critic Klaus Giovanni Koenig , will be seenNONMET on the streets of Milan for the next half .
Spotlessly clean and popular , the Jumbo is a long-term advertisement for Koenig's design skills .
The modern tram is a green machine .
AssumingMET the power station at the end of the line burnsMET cleanly , the tram is virtually pollution free .
Standing at traffic lights a Koenig-designed Jumbo is , save for the chatter inside , completely silent .
The overhead wires are so slight that you have to lookNONMET hard to seeNONMET them .
Powers of acceleration and braking are remarkable , the latter far greater than any car .
But  sadly , there is no indication that the GMA consortium which will designMET , operateMET and maintainMET the first of the new generation British trams in Manchester will shareMET the looks of their Milanese counterparts .
Artists ' impressions showMET a tram that has more in common with the flat- faced , characterless light trains of the toy like Docklands Light Railway .
There is still time for GMA ( GEC , Mowlem , Amec and Greater Manchester Buses ) to considerMET employingNONMET an inspired architect or industrial designer .
After all , Mancunians and visitors to the Manchester conurbation are goingNONMET to have to lookNONMET at these mechanical millipedes for  well into the twenty-first century .
Now that buses are no longer designedNONMET to enhanceNONMET the streets they serveMET , Manchester has a chance to makeMET a fresh start with its trams .
Manchester is not alone .
Other British towns , Croydon and Southampton among them , are also consideringMET modern tramways .
These are all referredNONMET to as ‘ supertram ’ networks , the implication being that the new- generation tram is an altogether more dynamic form of transport than its pre-war predecessors .
What it really meansMET is that the new trams are a hybrid between street car and lightweight suburban train .
Although they will slipMET through the city centre servingMET the essential parts — shopping malls , leisure centres , theme parks , amusement arcades and museums — the Manchester supertrams will also headMET out of town on a mix of reserved track and existing railway lines .
The supertram is , in effect , a low replacement for British Rail's ageing fleet of suburban diesel multiple-unit trains , those rasping diesels which change gear to the accompaniment of voluminous clouds of acrid black exhaust fumes and the blessing of train spotters .
They will performMET some of the same functions , but they will not be an exact replacement for traditional trams .
And although the supertram concept will spreadMET through major cities during the next decade , Blackpool will still be alone in its use of traditional double-deckers .
The churches builtNONMET on wool : Angela Lambert enjoysNONMET the riches at the heart of East Anglia By ANGELA LAMBERT UNTIL six or seven years ago , outsiders associated East Anglia with fens , flatness and the vanished Edwardian nannies of Frinton .
Its old churches , green fields and long beaches were cherishedNONMET by the inhabitants of Essex , Suffolk , Norfolk and Cambridgeshire , but not yet on the tourist agenda .
Today , I was toldNONMET , villagers livingNONMET around the great wool churches of Lavenham and Long Melford have to barNONMET their doors and ignoreNONMET the knocking of tourists , who takeMET them for antique shops and offer to buyNONMET their furniture .
The tourists are right .
East Anglia on a sunny weekend is a place of matchless beauty .
Its villages lookNONMET too good to be true .
Lavenham and Long Melford , for example , have no telegraph poles , to preserveMET the timeless air that pervadesMET them .
Yet you only have to readNONMET Ronald Blythe's Akenfield to realiseNONMET that these picturesque , half-timbered cottages , often paintedNONMET the characteristic Essex pink ( pale salmon ) , ochre or spring-leaf green , are more prosperous now than ever in the ‘ real ’ past .
Many are still elaborately decoratedNONMET with pargeting , an ornate , patterned plasterwork practised in this area since the early thirteenth century .
Most of East Anglia's prosperity today is due to City commuters , the second-homes market and tourism .
The ideal hotel from which to exploreNONMET is Dedham Hall , set among tall trees in the Vale of Dedham , lookingMET directly across towards Dedham church on one side and Flatford Mill on the other : both paintedNONMET by Constable .
The hotel lies in five acres of fields and garden , and the Slingos , who ownNONMET it , makeMET the most of their beautiful surroundings by running painting courses for about £200 a week ( including breakfast and dinner ) , or £90 for a long weekend .
These are so popular that you will needNONMET to bookNONMET at least a couple of months in advance .
The other great joy of Dedham Hall is the food .
The Slingos have their own vegetable garden , chickens , ducks , sheep and cows .
Everything is home-grown , home-made and fresh : it tastesNONMET like forgotten food .
If Dedham Hall is fully booked — and it may well be — tryNONMET the best bed-and-breakfast we have ever foundNONMET , just a few miles away at the Old Vicarage , Higham , near Colchester .
It is a rambling Tudor house runMET by John and Margaret Parker , whose breakfast room and drawing room look out over a wonderful walled garden , beyond which fields of grazing cows stretchMET down to the river .
Another hotel that would makeMET a good starting point for a weekend — or longer — in East Anglia is the Black Lion at Long Melford .
It changedMET hands recently and is now runMET by Stephen and Janet Errington .
After dinner there , when the moon was full and low and deep orange , we walkedNONMET up the road from the hotel to Long Melford church .
Its vast walls of flint and glass and Gothic tracery were brilliantly floodlit and the churchyard cat , sleek and black as tar , greetedMET us querulously and ledMET us right round the church and through the gravestones at the back , glimmeringNONMET and pale in the moonlight .
We were quite alone and the great church , the size of a cathedral , was unearthly in its floodlit , moonlit beauty .
Long Melford is one of the wool churches that commemorateMET the wealth of East Anglia in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries .
Another is at Lavenham , 10 minutes ' drive up the road .
Just inside the front porch , a handwritten book is prefacedNONMET with the words ‘ This book has been compiledNONMET that something , more than their mere names , may be knownNONMET of the Lavenham men who gaveMET their lives for their country in the Great War .
’ This is followedMET by 50 or so names , each with a description .
The much-thumbed book is deeply moving , and setsMET the tone for a walk round this glorious building , which has seenMET the christenings , marriages and burials of the folk of the village for more than 600 years .
East Anglia is exceptionally rich in churches and cathedrals .
There are several splendid houses near Long Melford that would makeMET for a gentle afternoon's potter through the rooms and possessions of the rich of a few centuries ago .
The loveliest , to my mind , is Melford Hall , whose charming , octagonal Jacobean gatehouse is reachedNONMET along an avenue of clipped yew trees and , with its high windows floodingMET the octagon with light , is my fantasy of the ideal study .
Lavenham is often calledNONMET the finest medieval village in England .
It is an image of the world we have lostMET , its gently sloping streets convergingNONMET upon the market place .
Here standMET the early sixteenth-century timberedNONMET Guildhall , now a museum to 700 years of the cloth industry .
Next to it is The Little Hall , datingNONMET from the fourteenth century , with its floorboards gleaming with the patina of age , low-beamed ceilings and a tiny , unruly , charming walled garden .
Precisely next   door  to this is a restaurant calledNONMET The Great House .
Here , in the cool , pretty setting of the dining room that was once Stephen Spender's , you will be servedNONMET an exquisite three- course lunch for £9.50 , £6 for children .
The wine list is small but perfectly chosenNONMET .
The service is impeccable .
East Anglia has bookshops filled with titles like 101 Things For A Boy To Do … Constable landscapes … Gainsborough's house … to sayNONMET nothing of huge grey sweeps of empty beach from which , at Aldeburgh , you can buyNONMET goggle-eyed skate direct from the fishing boats as they comeMET out of the water .
It has Colchester oysters .
It has Ely Cathedral , its great green windows castingMET a translucent light across the Lady Chapel .
With all this , small wonder it also has tourists .
A prayer for the brick cathedral facingNONMET St Paul's : Bankside Power Station is a masterpiece worth , preserving , Gavin Stamp arguesNONMET By GAVIN STAMP FROM the top of the dome of St Paul's Cathedral the view is no longer dominatedMET by City church steeples but by an intrusive cacophony of drab , characterless Sixties boxes .
One building stands out in this dispiriting panorama of post-war mediocrity : a dark powerful mass of brickwork with a tall central tower that standsMET right across the Thames from Wren's dome .
This is not an office block , nor a church — although its sublime form might suggestMET that its architect was adept at designingNONMET cathedrals .
It is , in fact , the now redundant oil-fired electric power station that sitsMET on Bankside next to the site of Sam Wanamaker's new Globe Theatre .
Bankside Power Station should never have been builtNONMET .
Its architect had spentMET the war years with fellow Royal Academicians planningNONMET the orderly and spacious London of the future , free of smoke and industry .
But , when askedNONMET in 1947 to replaceNONMET an old dirty power station that had been on the site since 1891 , he soon forgotMET such idealism and , like any architect , was glad to have the job .
The project was controversial and the power station was only permitted providingNONMET the smoke was clean and the building did not challengeMET the visual dominance of St Paul's .
So the single chimney roseMET only to 325ft , some 45ft below the height of the cross above the cathedral .
The irony is that had the tower been higher and had the teak ‘ scrubbers ’ been less efficient , the smoke would have goneMET straight up into the air .
As it was , the ‘ smokeless shimmer of vapour ’ was so cooledNONMET by cleaning that it driftedNONMET across the river to causeNONMET mischief with the leadwork on Wren's great dome .
Bankside Power Station should not have been builtNONMET .
But , as it was builtNONMET , it should not now be demolishedNONMET .
That is because it is a magnificent structure , the supreme architectural expression of the heroic , monumental phase of power station design and the creation of a great architect .
Bankside was the work of Sir Giles Gilbert Scott , OM , the architect of Liverpool's Anglican Cathedral , the rebuilt House of Commons and some of the last vital products of the Gothic Revival .
He was a designer of extraordinary versatility , being responsible for the standard ‘ traditional ’ red telephone kiosk , Waterloo Bridge and several power stations .
Bankside representsNONMET the fullest realisation of his industrial aesthetic .
Scott's first venture into this unlikely field of design was at Battersea where , in 1930 , he was wheeledMET in as a famous knighted architect by the London Power Company to tryNONMET to makeMET acceptable the coal-fired monster power station to which the residents of Chelsea and Westminster were takingMET strong exception .
This was a brilliant move .
Scott was so successful in stylingNONMET the building in fine brickwork with ‘ jazz-modern ’ fluting ( as John Betjeman calledNONMET it ) that , when the Battersea ‘ A ’ station was openedMET in 1934 it was widely acclaimedNONMET as a supremely successful modern treatment of a building type that seemedNONMET quintessentially twentieth century .
When , in 1939 , The Architects ' Journal conductedMET a survey to findMET what were consideredMET the best modern buildings in Britain , Battersea was placedMET second — and was the favourite of such unlikely celebrities as Sir Kenneth Clark , Rebecca West and Charles Laughton .
Scott was so pleased with the style he had evolvedMET at Battersea , a treatment that humanised industrial forms without denyingNONMET their function , that he also used it on the Guinness Factory at Park Royal , west London .
At Battersea , Scott could not alterNONMET the basic design of the building and he much disliked the ‘ upturned table ’ appearance createdNONMET by the four corner chimneys .
At Bankside , however , he was able to persuadeNONMET the engineers , Mott , Hay & Anderson , to gatherMET all the flues into a single ‘ slender tower or campanile ’ .
As a result , he was able to createNONMET a symmetrical , monumental composition of great power .
As at all his power stations , Scott facedMET the building in a fine Worcestershire brick that has weatheredNONMET to a lovely pinky-brown .
But there is nothing homely about the general effect .
Vast overlapping planes of brickwork are modelledNONMET with careful set-backs and subtle bands of detail .
The result is an expression of the monumental aesthetic of the early twentieth century , with strong American overtones .
When the campanile is seenNONMET from a distance , it seemsNONMET to belongNONMET to some strange Expressionist church one has not noticedNONMET before .
Not for nothing were such power stations describedNONMET as ‘ brick cathedrals ’ ; Bankside is the finest manifestation of this tradition .
Now it is redundant .
Smoke shimmers no longer from the tall tower .
But Bankside is nevertheless a sound structure which , like the best mills of the Industrial Revolution , is well worth preserving and is perfectly capable of adaptation for a new commercial use .
Such re-use is , of course , much encouragedMET by a building being listedNONMET , something which , until recently , was not possible with architecture of so recent a date .
Two years ago , however , the Department of the Environment at last beganMET the listing of post-war buildings in England that were more than 30 years old .
Bracken House , the former home of the Financial Times , becameNONMET the first candidate and English Heritage then submitted some 70 recommendations to the Department of the Environment ; these included Bankside .
This , however , was too much for the Government and , usingNONMET the excuse that public opinion was not yet ready to acceptMET the protection of many unpopular modern buildings , Lord Caithness , the Minister of State for the Environment , arbitrarily whittled down English Heritage's list to 18 buildings - excluding Bankside — although it representedNONMET a more traditional approach in the Fifties to the now-unfashionable Modern Movement .
However , Caithness himself stated that this first selection was ‘ in no way a definitive list … I have no doubt that others will be addedNONMET .
The important thing is that the Thirty Year Rule is in force and that we can respondMET to developing perceptions of our times .
’ Earlier this year , in my capacity as chairman of the Thirties Society , I askedNONMET Caithness's successor , Virginia Bottomley , to reconsiderNONMET English Heritage's recommendation of Bankside for listing .
My argument was that , as Michael Heseltine had so boldly listedNONMET Battersea Power Station in 1980 , it was illogical not to protectNONMET a much finer and more complete industrial work by the same architect .
Furthermore , the listing of Battersea had ensuredNONMET the building's survival for conversion to a new use — in that case , as an entertainment centre which the Prime Minister herself had praisedMET and inauguratedNONMET .
After two months ' silence , I was informedNONMET that ministers stoodMET by their decision .
I wroteNONMET back askingMET the reasons for this , pointingMET out that , if any large modern power station deservedMET to be listedNONMET , it was Bankside .
I have receivedNONMET no satisfactory reply .
Of course , I knowNONMET perfectly well why the Department of the Environment declinesMET to listNONMET it .
Listed building procedures might impedeNONMET the full commercial realisation of the site when the electricity industry is privatised .
Furthermore , British Rail has its eyes on the Bankside site for bringingNONMET up the spoil from the tunnel for Channel traffic which it is , so absurdly , drivingMET under the middle of London at astronomical cost .
Listing , in theory , is an objective assessment of architectural or historical importance which does not necessarily preventNONMET demolition .
In the case of Bankside Power Station , the ultimate ‘ temple of power ’ and a masterpiece of industrial architecture by a major twentieth-century British architect , our historic building system is being perverted for purely political reasons .
MUSICALS / Bows of Holly : Mark Steyn reviewsNONMET London's latest musical biography , Buddy , at The Victoria Palace By MARK STEYN THE TEXANS drawlNONMET ‘ Y'all ’ , blacks goNONMET ‘ Yo ’ , Hispanics leer ‘ Hey , ameeeeeeeego !
’ .
And toweringMET above these stage cliches is , of course , the driven genius whose music can not be stemmedMET by the forces of reaction .
Who is it this time ?
Wagner , Glenn Miller , Jason Donovan ?
No matter ; only the accents change — and the pants : here , the squares wearNONMET slacks , the good guys blue-jeans .
WarnedNONMET not to singNONMET rock'n'roll on a c&w station , Buddy Holly insistsNONMET , ‘ I gotNONMET ta playNONMET ma music .
’ MisunderstoodMET by Decca Records , he maintainsMET , ‘ I wanNONMET na playNONMET ma music ma way .
’ Even when the hits start , he's not content .
‘ We gotNONMET ta takeMET our music more serious , ’ he tellsNONMET the Crickets , who remain unconvinced .
‘ You  gotNONMET money , you gotMET fame , ’ he pleadsNONMET , ‘ what you wantNONMET to boozeNONMET for ?
’ Booze ?
We're midway through Act II and a solitary six-pack has yet to hoveNONMET  into view .
But this is a plot development — the plot development — and , if it involvesNONMET turningMET a couple of Aled Jones types into Oliver Reed , why letNONMET logic getMET in the way ?
As it happensNONMET , there is a kind of logic behind Buddy .
The most common reason for a biomusical is opportunism : takeMET a star like Judy Garland or John Lennon , and you pickMET up a hit title and a hit  score ready-made .
Now , Alan Janes's play matchesMET the well-loved songs with equally well-loved dialogue in a K-Tel  Golden  Greats  collection of Dramatists ' Reliables .
Choke up at The Price Of Fame : ‘ I giveMET ‘ em everything and they stickMET a knife in my back .
’ Fight back those tears at The Inevitable Parting : ‘ You and me , boy , I reckonMET we've comeMET to the end of our road .
’ Marvel at The Little Woman Behind The Man : ‘ I'd likeNONMET to singNONMET a song fer a special girlfriend who's kinda important to me .
’ The justification for this is authenticity .
‘ All that happensNONMET in the play is basedMET on fact , ’ Janes pledgesMET solemnly in the programme notes .
‘ As we knowNONMET , truth is often stranger than fiction .
’ Often ?
Most of us preferNONMET to watchNONMET Dallas than our neighbours ' home-movies , because , when it comes down to it , we knowNONMET that truth is generally a lot duller than fiction .
Occasionally , though , a dramatist will uncoverMET someone with an interesting story , regardless of how unknown or vaguely remembered the subject is .
How many of us can now recallMET the real Maria von Trapp or Fanny Brice ?
They liveMET only through The Sound Of Music and Funny Girl .
Buddy Holly comesMET somewhere between the subjects of those and more parasitic biographies .
His records are still played , but his personality , un exposed through movies or extensive TV interviews , is almost entirely unknown .
It is , in theory , the best of both worlds — except that Buddy Holly , by all accounts , was not terribly interesting .
He was bornNONMET in Lubbock , marriedNONMET a nice Spanish girl and diedNONMET young in a ‘ plane crash in 1959 .
All that counts are the records , a rhythmically unusual Tex-Mex fusion of rock'n'roll and older western elements , pioneeringMET what becameNONMET the standard pop instrumentation of two guitars , bass and drums .
The lyrics are another matter .
Of the two prototype rock songwriters , it's the more worldly Chuck Berry you turnMET to for the authentic picture of teenage pleasures in Eisenhower's America : ‘ GonNONMET na writeNONMET a little letter , GonNONMET na mailNONMET it to my local deejay .
’ Or : ‘ CruisingMET and playingNONMET the radio With no particular place to goNONMET .
’ Berry's songs are plausible emblems of rock'n'roll rebellion or , at any rate , youthful hedonism .
Buddy invitesMET us to regardMET Holly in the same light , mocking ( in a horribly nudgingMET re-creation ) Lubbock old-timers like The Hayriders , who singNONMET : ‘ When the sun goes down on Blue Ridge Mountain It's the time to whistleNONMET in your ear .
’ At least , this has a surreal daftness .
The voice of rock'n'roll , in contrast , is almost unrelievedly soupy .
If you didn't knowNONMET the tunes , you'd assumeMET Holly's lyrics decorated some innocent backporch  spooners from the turn : ‘ Stars appearNONMET and the shadows are fallin'MET You can hearNONMET my honey callin' .
’ Or : ‘ You giveMET me all your lovin' And your turtle-dovin' .
’ Or : ‘ When Cupid shotMET his dart He shotMET it at your heart .
’ Not only are these songs impossible to useNONMET dramatically , they're also too vague to useNONMET as incidental music , to underlineMET or punctuateMET aspects of Holly's life or the 1950s more generally .
‘ I wroteNONMET it for you , ’ he assuresNONMET his gal before the ballads , but how can you tellNONMET ?
All you can do with these songs is singNONMET them , and Buddy failsMET even to manageNONMET that with any subtlety .
The finales to both Acts are effectively concerts , the sort of agreeably naff rock'n'roll revival that might just about passMET muster as a Capital Gold one-nighter down the Hammersmith Palais .
And , for all the appeal of his singing and playingNONMET , Paul Hipp comesMET out pretty dull between the numbers .
To camouflageMET the failures of the play , Andy Walmsley has createdNONMET a set which resemblesNONMET a pile-up of roadside hoardings : Oldsmobile , Van Heusen shirts , Texaco Premium Type .
Rob Bettinson , the director , has deducedNONMET that he ought to have these images plus disc-jockeys , radio commercials , midwestern hops , but he doesn't seemNONMET to knowNONMET why .
Like most shows which are manufacturedMET with an eye to commercial success ( Winnie , High Society , to nameMET only Buddy's predecessors at the Victoria Palace ) , this one will probably failMET .
It's not as if there aren't aspects of his career that aren't worth exploringMET : how did he come to useNONMET drums , then almost unknown in Texan country line-ups ?
Was it true , as the chart performance of ‘ Heartbeat ’ ( his last release ) suggestsMET , that his three-year career was already on the wane ?
And surely any dramatist ought to be able to moveMET us with that final night of Holly's life , when his musicians ( including Waylon Jennings ) gaveNONMET their places on the ‘ plane to the Big Bopper and Ritchie Valens .
The author's job is not merely to offerNONMET an illustrated Who's Who entry , but to turnMET elements of a man's life into a dramatic entity .
And , if Holly's too boring for that , perhaps the best approach would be to writeNONMET about his impact on others .
That , after all , is what Don McLean did so brilliantly in ‘ American Pie ’ , a personal reaction to ‘ the day the music diedMET ’ .
‘ HER DRESS HANGSNONMET HERE' : DE-FROCKINGMET THE KAHLO CULT Oriana Baddeley The 1990s have witnessedMET a shift in the art establishment's attitudes towards art producedNONMET outside of its traditional parameters .
The work of previously marginalised artists has becomeNONMET an area of rich speculation among art dealers pricedNONMET out of the ‘ modern masters ’ market .
Almost every year has witnessedMET the discovery of new artistic terrain — graffiti art , Soviet art , Australian art , the art of Latin America .
The major auction houses have movedMET with the times and have foundMET new ways of selling works which in both form and content would have provedNONMET an unstable investment a decade ago .
The current status of the work of the Mexican painter Frida Kahlo is a dramatic example of this change .
Once knownNONMET primarily as the wife of Diego Rivera , her reputation outside of Mexico now far supercedesNONMET his : since 1919 , sale room estimates of her work have risenMET from $40,000 to over $1 million , and in 1990 a work by Kahlo brokeMET all records at Sotheby's New York for a Latin American artist .
The enormous rise in the economic value of her work has developedNONMET in tandem with the increased critical and popular response to her particular blend of naive style and incisive content .
While the first wave of popular interest aroseMET with the 1982 Whitechapel exhibition instigatedNONMET by Laura Mulvey and Peter Wollen , it was the publication of Hayden Herrera's biography of Kahlo in 1983 which has ledMET to her current cult status .
Since that date she has been the subject of TV documentaries , a feature film ( ‘ Frida ’ by Paul Leduc ) , a stage play , numerous publications and the inspiration for designer clothing .
In May 1989 Elle magazine ranMET a 16 page feature on Frida Kahlo as the ‘ spirit of Mexico ’ ( Fig. 1 ) , while in Vogue ( Feb. 1990 ) there was a 10 page interpretation of ‘ the romance of Frida Kahlo's Mexico ’ ( Fig. 2 ) .
Almost as a logical outcome of this media blitz , it emergedMET in the summer of 1990 that Madonna , already a devotee of Kahlo's work , was commissioningNONMET a screenplay basedMET on Kahlo's life .
Fig. 1 .
Elle Magazine , May 1989 , p. 18–19 .
As with most artists who have becomeNONMET mythical personalities in the popular imagination , such attention has focusedMET primarily on the anecdotal and tragic details of Kahlo's admittedly fascinating life .
The passionate obsession with her husband Diego Rivera , her flamboyant appearance , but most of all her physical and emotional pain have comeMET to dominateMET responses to her work .
While Kahlo's art helpedMET her to dealMET with the vicissitudes of her life , for most audiences it is her life story which allowsMET access to her art .
In this one can drawMET obvious parallels to the appeal of Van Gogh , a traditionally popular artist recently made fashionable by the media attention generated during the centennial of his death .
The archetypal dropout/spiritualist becameNONMET an appropriate icon for the sixties revival of 1990 ' s long hot summer .
Yet despite the iconic status of Van Gogh's ‘ tragic ’ life , it is the appearance of his work by which he is ultimately signifiedNONMET , his thick impasto brush-stroke , his vibrant yellows , the urgency of his creative drive .
In the case of Kahlo the popular image is of the artist herself , the characteristic brows , the elaborate hair , the Mexican costume ( Fig. 3 ) .
It is primarily her appearance , not the formal language of her art , that has gracedMET the pages of Elle and Vogue magazines .
The Elle feature transposedMET the ‘ Kahlo style ’ to Kahlo lookalikes in contemporary clothing balancedMET around segments of Herrera's biography of the artist .
In the later Vogue piece only the style remained as the far more overtly sexual , Kahloesque models lounged and poutedNONMET in their ‘ Mexican ’ interiors .
There is a poignant irony in the way clothing , which on one level served to hideNONMET Kahlo's broken body , falls or is liftedNONMET by the model to revealNONMET a luxuriantly perfect physique ( Fig. 4 ) .
The visual references in the two magazines are as much from photos of the artist as from her work .
In both features she is also seenMET to embodyNONMET a wider set of assumptions about Mexico itself ; exotic , passionate , yet constantly struggling against pain and deceit .
While Elle , Vogue and subsequently The Independent ( Fig. 5 ) , stressedMET different facets of Kahlo's public persona , they all sharedMET the emphasis on ‘ her ’ , as an encapsulisation of stereotypical images of Mexico , rather than her work .
It is her body as the canvas , her appearance as art .
The art of self-expression becomesNONMET self-expression as art .
Fig. 2 .
Vogue , February 1990 , p. 130–1 .
Fig. 3 .
Elle Magazine , May 1989 , p. 28 .
Of course , the line between art and life is a particularly hard one to drawMET in Kahlo's case .
The majority of her work is self portraiture ; her aesthetic concerns grewMET from her fascination with the falsity of appearance .
Dressing up , role playingNONMET and masquerade form the conceptual basis of Kahlo's work .
In Self-Portrait with Cropped Hair ( 1944 ) ( Fig. 6 ) , she paintsNONMET herself wearingNONMET Rivera's suit , challenging traditional expectations of femininity and attemptingNONMET to appropriateMET his authority ( while simultaneously ) threatening castration ) .
More disturbingly , in The Mask ( 1945 ) ( Fig. 7 ) , she throwsMET doubt on too straightforward a reading of her self-portraits as revealing of her inner emotions .
Where does the mask fallMET : Does not the ritual repetition of those familiar features ‘ mask ’ far more than it uncoversMET ?
There is , however , an inevitable logic to the appropriation of her meticulously constructed image , a process which the artist was mockingNONMET as early as 1933 : ‘ … some of the gringa women are imitatingNONMET me and tryingNONMET to dressNONMET ‘ a la Mexicana ’ , but the poor souls only lookNONMET like cabbages and to tellNONMET you the naked truth they lookNONMET absolutely impossible .
' The ‘ impossibility ’ stemmedMET from the failure of such followers to recogniseMET the symbolic importance of Kahlo's choice of clothing , a failure also intrinsic to her recent magazine appearances .
The particularities of post-revolutionary Mexico are frequently subsumedNONMET by the decorativeness of the ethnic , by the generalised attractiveness of the radical avant-garde .
For Kahlo , however , choosingMET to donNONMET the costume of the Tehuana , as for example in Tree of Hope ( 1946 ) ( Fig. 8 ) , was to embody a powerful icon of cultural identity .
Mexican Indian dress is extraordinarily diverse and by and large geographically specific , varyingNONMET from region to region .
The Tehuana dress is by no means the most decorative variant or the closest to pre-Hispanic forms of clothing .
It is the mythology surroundingMET the women wearers of the costume which directedMET Kahlo's choice .
The ostensibly matriarchal society of Tehuantepec ledMET to the adoption of the Tehuana , in post-revolutionary Mexico , as the image of the strong Indian woman ; the undefeated counterpart to the despised ‘ Chingada ’ , who , conversely is the female embodiment of Mexico's hybrid post-conquest culture .
In a culture where sexual metaphors are frequently usedNONMET to conveyMET racial and political conflict , the Tehuana representsMET that aspect of Mexico's indigenous tradition unbowed by centuries of colonial and male rule .
Kahlo's adoption of Tehuana dress , while being an attractive disguise of what she sawMET as a less than perfect body , assertedMET both a feminist and an anti-colonialist position .
Fig. 4 .
Vogue , February 1990 , p. 138 .
Fig. 5 .
The Independent on Sunday , 8th April 1990 , p. 37 .
In Kahlo's work there is a powerful mix of these discourses , yet her role as an archetypal woman painter has comeMET to dominateMET responses to her work .
It is through her emergence as a cult painter of the feminist movement of the 1970s that her current reputation has evolvedMET .
Her work almost perfectly illustratesMET debates as to the nature of traditional exclusions of a woman's art .
The fascination with functions of the body , the analogies between artistic and physical creative processes , self-portraiture used to revealMET the female body as the site of patriarchal aesthetic discourse ; all of these mirrorMET the concerns of many women painters of the 1980s .
Fig. 6 .
Frida Kahlo : Self-portrait with cropped hair , 1940 , 40x27.9 cm .
Museum of Modern Art , New York .
Fig. 7 .
Frida Kahlo : The Mask , 1945 , 40x30.5 cm .
Coll .
Dolores Olmeda .
Fig. 8 .
Frida Kahlo : The Tree of Hope , 1946 , 55.9x40.6 cm .
Coll .
IsidoreNONMET Ducasse Fine Arts Inc .
In their formal language , Kahlo's works are exemplary of certain feminist arguments ; the adoption of the decorative , the intimate and non -fine art mediums revealsMET the restrictive nature of traditional definitions of ‘ high art ’ .
This ‘ appropriateness ’ of Kahlo's aesthetic to contemporary debate has tendedNONMET to removeMET her work from its historical context , to stressMET the collective and the cross-cultural .
Although this is not in itself to be dismissedMET as a tactic , it has diminishedNONMET the complexity of Kahlo's achievement as a specifically Mexican painter , operatingMET within the particularities of her historical moment .
More problematic is the way in which such a dislocation has ledMET to the acceptance of her ‘ Mexicanness ’ as mere decoration of the essentially feminist themes of her work , thereby defusingMET a substantial part of the art describedNONMET by Breton as a ‘ ribbon round a bomb ’ .
It is the ribbon that runsMET through the pages of Vogue , the glossy surface of the images in direct opposition to a work such as Kahlo's The Suicide of Dorothy Hale ( 1939 ) ( Fig. 9 ) .
In this painting , a memorial to a woman's tragic death is transformedNONMET into an indictment of the culture which destroyedMET her .
Hale's suicide becameNONMET a poignant metaphor for the oppressive nature of the social values of New York and North America in general .
The story behind Hale's death was one with which Kahlo obviously identifiedMET , and within which dress formed an important symbolic function .
Before jumpingNONMET from the window of her apartment , Hale had dressedNONMET meticulously in her most flattering dress , the corsage of yellow roses a gift from a male admirer .
In Kahlo's painting , the figure falls from the fantasy world she has inhabitedMET to the harsh bloodspattered reality of the street , literally comingNONMET down to earth .
Hale's eyes stareMET knowingly at the viewer , a human sacrifice to an alienated and consumerist culture .
The horizontality of her fallen body is juxtaposedNONMET to the vertical thrust of the apartment building .
She leapsMET from an architectural monument to a phallocentric world .
Although destroyedNONMET , she has also escapedNONMET .
The painting , dedicated to Hale's mother , was commissionedNONMET by a mutual friend of Kahlo and Dorothy Hale , the managing editor of Vanity Fair , Clare Boothe Luce .
The painting was agreedNONMET to by Luce in part to recompense for what she sawMET as her misjudgment of her dead friend .
Having lentNONMET Hale money to payNONMET her rent she had been angeredNONMET to discoverMET her spending enormous sums on an haute-couture dress , and refused to turnMET up not PRP but AVP + PRP; phrasal=[turn up] what , in retrospect , becameNONMET Hale's farewell party .
Later it was revealedMET that the money had comeMET from a different source .
A male friend had triedNONMET to dissuadeNONMET Hale from seekingNONMET a much needed job and had givenNONMET her a thousand dollars to buyNONMET ‘ the most beautiful dress in New York ’ , tellingNONMET her that what she neededNONMET was to findNONMET a rich husband .
On one level this work deals with a generalised ‘ woman's experience ’ , yet the metaphorical power of Dorothy Hale's dress derivesMET from Kahlo's use of clothing in her own self-portraits .
DressNONMET not only covers and decoratesNONMET the body but instilsNONMET in the wearer its own characteristic strengths and weaknesses .
Hale's black velvet dress is cursedNONMET because it representsNONMET the values of the ‘ Gringolandia ’ so hated by Kahlo .
In those paintings where Kahlo wearsNONMET European dress she is passive , weak and unable to controlMET her own destiny , but in the Tehuana costume she is strong , powerful , hopeful .
Unclothed , her body becomesNONMET yet more vulnerable , but as Jean Franco statesNONMET : The unclothed body is not a ‘ self but a socialised body , a body that is openedMET by instruments , technologizedMET , wounded , its organs displayedMET to the outside world .
The ‘ inner ’ Frida is controlledMET by modern society far more than the clothed Frida , who often marksMET her deviation from the norm by defiantly returningMET the gaze of the viewer .
Kahlo's naked body becomesNONMET not just the tortured self of her personal biography but a visual counterpart to the injured and defiled manifestations of Mexico's colonised past : La Llorona ‘ the weeping woman ’ of popular myth and La Chingada , the raped and abused mother describedNONMET in Paz's The Labyrinth of Solitude .
DescendedMET from an Aztec mother goddess , Llorona is a long-suffering mother figure , symbolic in a wider sense of the trauma of the Spanish invasion .
Driven mad with grief by the loss of her child , she is thoughtNONMET to wanderNONMET the streets weeping and  cryingNONMET out a ghostly memory of the pre-Conquest past .
At its most simple , La Chingada , as the mother of Mestizo culture is ‘ the Mother forcibly opened , violated or deceivedNONMET ’ .
The female soil possessed and misusedMET by the masculine force of the Spanish invaders .
The Indian Mexico raped and abusedMET by the conquistador yet bearingMET his bastard child .
The rhetoric of the Tehuana opposesMET the nihilism of traditional feminisations of colonial trauma , and assertsMET the potential of a dignified cultural resistance .
Fig 9 .
Frida Kahlo : The Suicide of Dorothy Hale , 1939 , 58.1x47.5 cm .
Phoenix Art Museum , Arizona .
A major , though often ignoredNONMET , work by Kahlo demonstratesMET the cultural politics underlyingNONMET her art .
My Dress HangsNONMET There ( 1939 ) ( Fig. 10 ) is one of the artist ’ s most formally adventurous works , mixingMET photographic collage with paint to produceMET a critique of North American culture .
Kahlo does not appearNONMET in the work , her Tehuana costume hangsNONMET empty in the centre of the composition , suspended between a toilet bowl and a golfing trophy .
On one level My Dress … is a coda to Self-Portrait on the Borderline ( 1932 ) ( Fig. 11 ) of the previous year .
This small painting on metal , in the style of a Catholic votive image , showsMET the artist poisedMET between the technological inhumanity of a capitalist North America and the archaic fertility of Mexico .
InterwovenMET with these images are subtler references to the metaphorical borderlines which separateMET Latin American culture from that of Europe and North America .
This is done by a series of juxtapositions ; the past versus the present ; female nature versus masculine technology ; growth versus exploitation ; and in its very material presence , the traditions of fine art versus the popular .
At the same time the ambivalence of her own , and modern Mexico's position is manifestedNONMET in the figure of the artist .
The paper flag of her homeland is contrastedNONMET to the modernity of the cigarette held in her other hand .
The red and green of the Aztec necklace linksMET it compositionally with the indigenous plants to the ‘ south ’ of the painting , the pink colonial-style dress tonally blendingMET with the skyscrapers to the ‘ north ’ .
My Dress … again suggestsMET a conflict , but the ambivalence is goneMET .
Nature has been banishedMET , technology and its concomitant values reign over a harshly masculine world .
Three elements referMET to the female presence , all of them dealingMET with an essential lack .
The empty dress , a peeling poster of Mae West and in the far distance the Statue of Liberty .
Fig. 10 .
Frida Kahlo : My Dress HangsNONMET There , 1933 , 46x50 cm , estate of dr .
Leo Eloesser .
Although occasionally humorous , the work presentsMET a bleak view of urban alienation .
The Church , Wall Street , and Industry are joinedNONMET by a network of telephone lines , formingNONMET a remorsely inhuman environment .
Beneath this man-made mechanism of oppression are the people , literally distancedNONMET from their surroundings by Kahlo's use of photo-collage .
In the forefront of this scene fluttersMET the dress , incongruously vibrant despite its suggestion of loss .
DislocatedMET from its political context , it hangsMET like a piñata above the teeming streets of the city ; decorative yet potentially explosive .
There is no place ‘ there ’ for the values the Tehuana dress representsMET , its folds are given meaning by Kahlo's search for a cultural identity .
Within the confines of the painting it becomesNONMET a silent emblem of protest , a reminder of political alternatives .
The physicality so characteristic of Kahlo's work is missing , no flesh , no blood , just the tawdriness of the peeling poster and the hollow reminder of lost Liberty .
The inter-relationship of body and dress so self-consciously referredNONMET to in many of Kahlo's most polemical works ( Fig. 12 ) has been strangely inverted by her current popularity .
Her ‘ Mexicanness ’ has become a stylistic gloss , decorative , colourful , pretty , even individualistic .
The colonised body which Kahlo clothedMET in revolutionary idealism has lostMET its function as a symbol of nationhood becomingNONMET instead an icon of female suffering .
What is obscuredMET by this process is that it was through clothing , in both art and life , that Kahlo attemptedNONMET to redressMET the wrongs of history .
Fig. 11 .
Frida Kahlo : Self-Portrait on the Border , 1932 , 33x45.8 cm .
Coll .
Mr & Mrs Manuel Reyero .
Fig. 12 .
Frida Kahlo : The Two Fridas , 1939 , 173.5x173 cm .
Museo de Arte Moderno , Mexico D.F .
Jackboots beneath the serge Television .
By Hugh Hebert THERE was one point when the hair on the back of my head beganNONMET to lift .
Not at Paul Hill's remembrance of beatings past , when he could hearNONMET the sound of steel-tipped boots runningMET to takeMET part in the fun , and once heard a principal medical officer , no less , tellingNONMET colleagues : ‘ Don't walkNONMET his face , don't walkNONMET his face .
’ Not even the time he was dunked head first in a tub of dubious liquid , and broughtNONMET up gaspingNONMET for breath : ‘ MakeMET him singNONMET God SaveNONMET the Queen !
’ they shoutedNONMET .
Brutality , as Hill  describesNONMET and feltMET it , was a bitter part of his prison life ; you just learntNONMET to getNONMET down on the floor as fast as you could and cover up as best you could .
But it was Gerry Conlon's account of being interrogatedNONMET after the Guildford bombings that madeMET the  scalp crawl .
We knowNONMET your mother worksNONMET at the Royal Victoria Hospital , they toldNONMET him , we knowNONMET where your sister worksNONMET , and there are sectarian killings down there .
‘ They toldNONMET me they could arrangeMET an ‘ accident ’ .
And I believedNONMET they were capable of murderingNONMET my mother , I honestly believeNONMET they would have murderedNONMET my mother — that's why I signedNONMET the statement .
’ The account he gaveMET just after his release was that the threat had been that a British soldier might ‘ accidentally ’ shootNONMET one of the women .
A few months ago even , this would have seemedNONMET improbable .
You might have assumedMET this was the police bluffingMET and bullying .
Yet givenNONMET what we have learnedNONMET about links between the security  services and the Loyalist paramilitaries in Northern Ireland , and the deep suspicion about surrogate murders , you can't shrugMET off the shiver Conlon's words bringMET .
There were daunting moments in last night's First Tuesday ( Yorkshire ) , but few of them matched that hint of a jackboot under the blue serge .
It's right that the Guildford Four have toldNONMET their stories now to Grant McKee and Ros Franey and First Tuesday , the programme and the producers who dugMET away , and did much to keepMET the case alive .
And they toldNONMET it without on-screen questioning , though the programme is skilfully structured to giveMET it a coherence it might have lackedNONMET .
Carole Richardson's is the most haunting face .
You have to hopeNONMET that its blankness will slowly dissolveMET and letMET life in .
Just once a couple of tears rolled down .
It was when she  describedNONMET seeingNONMET film of the results of the bombing on television , and thinking : ‘ They thinkNONMET I did that !
’ Armstrong seemsNONMET the least permanently damagedMET on the surface .
He paysMET tribute to his treatment at Gartree prison , he apologisesNONMET to the bomb victims ' families that they have had to keepNONMET remindingNONMET them of their loss : ‘ But we had to fightMET for our freedom .
’ Hill expressesMET the way time has cheatedMET them : his daughter was bornNONMET while he was remandedNONMET in custody , and is now 14 : ‘ She would changeMET dramatically and I didn't feelMET a change in myself mentally .
I'm still 20 in my head .
Nothing's happenedNONMET to me .
I haven't livedNONMET .
’ But again it was Conlon , the slightly wild-eyed Irish poet of the quartet , articulateNONMET , flamboyant — rememberNONMET that extraordinary exit through the front door of the Old Bailey — who cutMET deep into the collective conscience .
He describedNONMET being takenNONMET over the years to seeNONMET his sick , and finally dying and almost certainly innocent father in another prison .
He was convictedNONMET with the Maguires in the parallel case of a ‘ bomb factory ’ .
And he tellsNONMET how none of the assembled guards and officials could lookNONMET his father in the eye as he protestedNONMET his innocence .
Only the nurses could do that .
And at the end , Conlon drewMET the one hopeful conclusion : ‘ If this stopsNONMET capital punishment ever comingMET back , the time I've spentMET in prison will be well worth it .
If this stopsNONMET another innocent person goingNONMET to prison , it'll be well worth it … ‘ I've had numerous prison governors sayNONMET to me , Yes , Conlon , we knowNONMET you're innocent , but there's nothing we can do about it .
We getMET a custody order , and that's it .
What sort of system of justice is that ?
’ IT wasn't the only programme last night to shineMET light into dirty corners .
Inside The Brotherhood ( Granada ) , producedNONMET by Claudia Milne and Martin Short , dugMET into the most notorious area of Masonic influence , local government .
In Southend , where 3,000 of the 50,000 adult males are reckonedMET to be Masons , it wentMET into the case of what you might callNONMET Preferential Allocation of Council Property , and the battle of one councillor , Christopher Hudson , to breakMET the grip of the men on the Square : ‘ We can't have a secret society operating within the framework of a democracy , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ It's a paradox , it's a nonsense .
’ Though over the years , from Southend to Tyneside and the Government's own Property Services Agency , there's all too much evidence that this is exactly what we do have .
The US setsMET its compass on two trading oceans Notebook .
By Edited by Alex Brummer CANBERRA may seemNONMET an awful long way from exchanges on the floor of the House of Commons over the European Monetary System .
But were it not for the  perceived economic might of a more unified Economic Community , the dozen or so nations of the Pacific Rim , who have been meetingMET in Australia , might not have botheredMET .
The first , albeit tenative , steps towards formingMET a new Pacific-based economic union display an astute awareness of the way events are movingMET within Europe : movements with which Number 10 has yet to comeMET to grips .
Not so long ago it seemedNONMET as if the world was to divideMET into three main trading blocks : the EC basedMET around the West German economy ; a Northern American block basedMET around the US-Canadian free trade area , and a Pacific unit incorporatingNONMET the Asian tigers with Japan and the yen at the centre .
But the Metternich-like skills of the US Secretary of State , Mr James Baker , are ensuringNONMET that America maintainsMET a strong stake in each forum .
It firstly boldly askedMET for a seat at the top table at the European Community : a suggestion rudely rebuffedNONMET .
The US has talkedMET of a genuine North American free trade zone incorporatingNONMET the US , Canada and Mexico which would have the best of all worlds with high skills and a cheap labour force south of the Rio Grande .
Now it is makingMET a third bid for influence .
It has turnedMET up in Canberra with Japan to  developNONMET Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation ( APEC ) and a new 12-nation organisation which will mimicMET the role of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in Europe .
Preliminary steps takenMET to conductMET studies on trade , technology and investment flows in the region may seemNONMET insignificant .
But Mr Baker plainly viewsMET it as otherwise .
He notedMET that the Canberra meeting ‘ is the start of something which could growMET into a very significant development not only for the region but for the global economy .
’ If the more economically puny ASEAN countries ( Indonesia , Malaysia , Singapore , Brunei , Thailand and the Philippines ) were to buryMET their reservations , then the high growth from other partners , including such tigers as Thailand and South Korea alongside the more mature economies of Japan and Australia , could meanNONMET a dynamic coalition .
It would then be up to the US and Canada to decideMET whether they wantNONMET to faceMET towards the Atlantic or Pacific — or be caughtMET between two great trading oceans .
Heading for default .
THE QUESTION of just who would even wantNONMET to be a partner with the US was underlinedMET last night as the American Administration headedMET for default for the first time in its history .
Congress was frantically tryingMET to completeNONMET a bill raisingMET the federal debt ceiling in time for President Bush to signNONMET today .
Leaders on Capitol Hill virtually putMET all other business on hold as it soughtMET to hammer out a debt ceiling increase .
The Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady , a level headed figure , warnedNONMET that the imbroglio may leadMET to higher interest costs for the taxpayer .
What should have been a routine exercise in extendingMET the Government's borrowing power to $3.1 thousand billion becameNONMET boggedMET down in wrangling over legislative initiatives lawmakers wanted to attachMET to the bill .
As a result of the stalemate , the Treasury has been forcedMET to postponeNONMET $40billion in debt auctions this week .
Lack of congressional action also forced the Treasury to suspendMET new sales of US savings bonds and of special securities for state and local governments .
This market sensitive dispute has takenMET place as President Bush and Congress continued to sparMET on a primary cause for government borrowing — the budget deficit .
At a press conference to markMET his election victory a year ago , Mr Bush threatenedNONMET to vetoNONMET the budget unless it containedMET real cuts .
Otherwise Congress would have to faceMET the consequences of automatic across-the-board cuts under the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings budget deficit reduction law .
America may have changedMET Presidents a year ago , but the fiscal thicket remainsNONMET as inpenetrable as ever .
Political expediency .
NO LONGER can the Government disguiseMET the crisis surrounding electricity privatisation .
Ministers have already had to pullMET Britain's fleet of Magnox reactors out of the float and delayNONMET the sell-off date by up to six months .
But it has now becomeNONMET clear that further drastic amendments are neededNONMET to flotation plans .
After months of turning deaf ears to warnings by the City and industry , the Department of Energy has at last concededMET that nuclear plant can not be includedMET in the share float without  state support .
This leavesMET the Energy Secretary , Mr John Wakeham , with two options : he can either agreeNONMET to underwriteNONMET any cost escalations in nuclear handling costs after privatisation , or he can swallowMET his pride , and pullMET all nuclear plant out of the impending sale .
Whatever the outcome , the Government's willingness to continueNONMET pushing through the float during this Parliament showsMET how ministers are prepared to putMET political expediency before the interests of the industry .
For the nuclear element in electricity privatisation is the coping stone on which the flotation plans are basedMET .
National Power was givenMET 70 per cent of the CEGB's generating capacity in order to giveMET it an economic mix of power .
The other 30 per cent is to be operatedMET by PowerGen , the other CEGB successor company .
TakeMET away or subsidiseNONMET all nuclear power stations and you loseMET the commercial logic of the privatisation plans .
Electricity privatisation needsNONMET to goMET back to the drawing board .
At the very least , the CEGB should be dividedMET into a wider range of generating companies to stimulateMET competition .
Is it worth sacrificingMET the long-term future of Britain's biggest state owned industry to makeMET political capital in the run-up to the next election ?
22COMMENT THE GUARDIANWednesday November 8 1989 More than just another disaster .
THIRTY FIVE people diedNONMET and others were maimedNONMET for life in the Clapham rail disaster in December last year because work was done in a slovenly , haphazard way and was then leftMET unchecked .
The disaster was all the more stunning because people had comeMET to assumeMET that such things didn't happenNONMET .
In most years , rail deaths are few : in some there are none at all .
Clapham , indeed , accountsNONMET for nearly half the 77 fatalities of the last ten years : compareNONMET that with the 5,000 deaths and 300,000 injuries every year on the roads .
Yet yesterday's report on the Clapham crash , confirming the picture which emergedMET throughout the Hidden inquiry , makesMET an event which seemedNONMET at the time totally unexpected look almost inevitable .
This was a system hopelessly under strain .
Under strain for a start because it was technically ill-equipped to avertMET disaster or to copeMET with the consequences when disaster struck ; under strain from commercial pressures which , as the inquiry putsMET it , ‘ compromised ’ safety ; under strain above all because the people on the spot couldn't or wouldn't copeNONMET , were weary from gruesome working hours ( the senior signal technician who headsMET the list of the culpable had had only one day off in the past 13 weeks ) , lackedNONMET adequate training , or simply couldn't be bothered .
The bulk of the blame for all that is placedMET on British Rail , which knowingly permitted these things to continue .
Though individuals are nailedMET , the greatest villain of all is the system .
In a desperately competitive climate , where anyone bright and competent could goMET down the road and pickMET up a better paid job with kinder hours and more congenial working conditions from someone like British Telecom , the railways ranMET a service dependent on people who belongedNONMET to a narrow and inbred working culture , with outdated procedures of training and promotion , and an institutional reliance on overtime workingNONMET , whose wholly disgraceful dimensions are symbolisedMET by the fact that maximum weekly hours were only recently cutMET to 72 hours a week .
The Transport Secretary , Mr Cecil Parkinson , assuredNONMET the Commons yesterday that financial considerations would not standMET in the way of implementingNONMET Sir Anthony Hidden's 93 recommendations .
On the technical side ,  remedial work is in many cases already on the way .
But the  job of liftingMET the standards of people employed , givingMET them  proper training , and payingNONMET a wage which breaksMET dependence on overtime and liftsMET morale : this together must far exceedMET the costs of the technology , and it isn't by any means clearMET what the bill will be or where the money will comeMET from .
All of which is not just a problem for a properly penitent British Rail : it's a problem for government too .
Government fixesMET the format in which BR has to workMET ; and if , as the Hidden report attestsMET , many of its problems today reflectMET lack of past planning , lack of farsighted investment , livingMET from hand to mouth , then that is not just BR's doing .
Government compoundsMET all these problems when it setsMET down working parameters which failMET to reflectMET the value the country getsMET from a system that is runMET efficiently , can shiftMET people to destinations with exemplary speed and safety — as Europe consistently demonstratesMET .
It is sad , and somewhat ominous , that so little of that should have been reflectedMET in the sombre statement which Mr Parkinson madeMET in the House yesterday .. A service in chaos .
THE nation's ambulance service was in manifest chaos yesterday .
There was no service in London , with all 71 stations and 455 vehicles off the road .
The only accident and emergency relief was providedNONMET by the police , part-time St John ambulance volunteers runningNONMET 20 vehicles , and the Red Cross .
Outside the capital , accident and emergency services were being providedNONMET in most areas , but the ban on emergency work was tightenedMET .
The service was facingMET its biggest crisis since the ambulances cameMET to a stop in the Winter of Discontent ten years ago .
Like Labour in 1979 , the Conservatives have putMET military ambulances on standby .
They move in today .
What has goneMET wrong ?
There are three key causes of the shambles : Mr Kenneth Clarke ; the failure to separateMET emergency from non-emergency work ; and the Whitley Council negotiating machinery .
The Health Secretary accusedMET the unions of ‘ posturing and pretendingMET ’ to runMET a 999 service yesterday .
He was right .
By refusingNONMET to keepMET open two-way radio links , the  crews had effectively endedNONMET a  proper emergency service .
The move was signalledMET last week and , true to their promised response , management suspendedMET the workers involved in the disruption .
But ‘ posturing and pretending ’ wentMET far beyond the unions .
Mr Clarke has been indulgingNONMET in just that himself , puttingMET up the luckless Duncan Nichol , chief executive of the health service , to takeMET the initial flak under the pretence that the dispute is not his direct responsibility .
Yet it was Mr Clarke , not Mr Nichol , who was involved in the critical decisions — the cash limit for the NHS , the 6.5 per cent offer to ambulance workers ( comparedMET to seven per cent for nurses , eight per cent for doctors and nine per cent for ancillary workers ) ; and today's introduction of military ambulances .
Ambulance workers on emergency work do deserveNONMET a much higher increase .
They have progressedMET far beyond routine first aid .
Their paramedical skills coverMET highly technical procedures : intubation , infusion and defebrillation .
The crews are able to resuscitateNONMET heart attack patients , replaceNONMET fluid intraveneously after severe blood loss , and insert tubes to maintainNONMET air supplies in unconconscious casualties .
Yet the ambulance worker is only being offeredNONMET £10,000 , when a fire officer is being givenNONMET £13,000 and a Metropolitan police constable can earnNONMET £25,000 .
But only two million out of the 20 million journeys which ambulance crews carryMET out each year are emergency  calls .
Nine out of 10 are routine calls , many of which could be carriedMET out by mini cabs .
Mr Duncan Nichol wantsNONMET to separateMET the emergency from the non-emergency work .
He is right to pursueMET this line .
Wiltshire and Northumbria have already shownMET how much can be achievedNONMET .
The ramshackle Whitley Council negotiating machinery is the other reason why the ambulance workers have lost out .
Until this year , the three independent review bodies which makeMET recommendations for nurses , doctors and the professions alliedMET to medicine have givenMET much higher awards than the Whitley Councils .
As Lord McCarthy notedMET some 13 years ago , the management side of the councils compriseNONMET ‘ employers who do not payNONMET and paymasters who do not employNONMET .
’ A much more flexible system which would allowMET local managers to negotiateNONMET local rates — on a national pay spine — is neededNONMET .
A crisis ; an agenda for reform and honesty .
One Mr Clarke can not duckMET away from if he wantsNONMET to avoidMET a second Winter of Discontent .. Opening , closing .
PRINCE CHARLES is jolly good at opening things .
He needsNONMET to be for the next four days in Hong Kong , because he will be hard at work cutting ribbons and layingNONMET foundation stones .
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology , the Hong Kong Island Divisional Headquarters of the Red Cross , the new Cultural Centre , and many more .
He is even re-opening the already opened Eastern Harbour tunnel and subway crossing .
It is all standard royal stuff , but not much help to the millions who fearNONMET that Hong Kong will not remainNONMET open after 1997 .
The whole point of a visit to Hong Kong now , five months after Tiananmen Square , should be to declareNONMET with royal authority that Britain sharesMET the concerns of the Hong Kong people and is determined to do something about them .
There was already a rather perfunctory air to the Queen's visit three years ago , as if it were just a required coda to her tour of China .
When the Prince and Princess of Wales quite rightly scrapped their tour of the mainland , they had the opportunity to makeMET a contrasting point in Hong Kong .
Unless they can sayNONMET something relevant in the next four days , the many Hong Kong critics who believeNONMET the visit is a waste of dollars will be absolutely right .
It did not helpNONMET at all that upon arrival yesterday the royal couple instantly touched base in that comforting symbol of past British power , the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank .
If there is a failure of imagination to useNONMET the royal visit creatively it will also be a failure of nerve .
Britain still can not decideMET when to playMET the mandarinate game of silence with the Chinese and when to breakMET the rules ( as Beijing does all the time .
) The ideal tactics should be a mixture of both , but only if a clear message can be communicatedMET to the Hong Kong people that someone is standingMET up for them somewhere .
Instead the latest developments in Sino-British relations have leftMET them even more confused than before .
China claimsMET that the Hong Kong Government recently gaveMET a written commitment to limitMET the activities of the pro-democracy movement in the territory .
The government deniesMET this , but has publishedMET the text of a letter from its Political Adviser to the New China News Agency ( Beijing's embassy in Hong Kong ) suggestingMET that it did .
In a tone of meek appeasement , the letter drawsMET attention to the arrest by Hong Kong police of anti-China demonstrators outside the agency's National Day reception .
It also remindsMET Beijing that permission has been refusedNONMET for local protesters to erectNONMET a replica Statue of Democracy on a permanent site .
It endsNONMET by assuringMET Beijing that the Hong Kong Government will have ‘ a prudent regard for the special circumstances of Hong Kong and the interests and concerns of the Chinese Government .
’ Meanwhile the flood of letters of a very different sort from anxious Hong Kong citizens to this and every other newspaper office continuesNONMET .
So do the Chinese press statements assertingMET that Hong Kong is ‘ entirely a business between China and Britain ’ and should not be discussedMET , formally or informally , at any international forum .
The only two Hong Kong legislators who consistently dareNONMET to speak out , Mr Martin Lee and Mr Szeto Wah , have been threatenedNONMET with expulsion from the committee now draftingNONMET China's post-1997 Basic Law .
Our latest Foreign Secretary has yet to publicly pick up the file marked Hong Kong .
There is still endless dithering on how broad a ‘ safety net ’ Britain will extendMET to its citizens .
They may rightly feelMET that it is all really rather appalling .
Letters to the Editor Law Report .
Parliament urged to thinkMET again on housing issue : .
Queen's Bench Divisional Court Sandwell Metropolitan Borough Council v Bujok Before Lord Justice Watkins and Mr Justice Hutchison November 2 1989 IF a dwelling house is in such a state of disrepair as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance , the tenant may layMET an information against his landlord allegingNONMET the existence of a statutory nuisance under the Public Health Act 1936 .
The tenant is not obliged to ensureNONMET that the landlord is aware of the defects in the premises or to giveMET the landlord an opportunity to remedyNONMET the defects before commencingNONMET legal proceedings .
Although that is the position in law , the court emphasisedMET that as a matter of common sense a tenant should first complainNONMET to the landlord before exercisingMET the right to prosecuteNONMET .
The facts .
Mrs Bujok and her family occupiedNONMET a house as council tenants .
In September 1988 Mrs Bujok laidMET an information against the council allegingNONMET the existence and continuance of a statutory nuisance under section 92(1) of the Public Health Act 1936 .
It was allegedNONMET that the council , being the owners of the premises , were the persons by whose act , default or sufferance the nuisance aroseMET .
Prior to layingMET the information Mrs Bujok had not servedMET an abatement notice upon the council or informedNONMET them of the alleged defects in the premises .
The justices heldMET Mrs Bujok was not requiredNONMET to ensureNONMET that the council were aware of the defective state of the property prior to layingMET the information .
The council appealedMET by case stated .
The legislation .
Section 92(1) of the 1936 Act definesMET ‘ statutory nuisances ’ as ‘ any premises in such a state as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance ’ .
The decision .
Mr Justice Hutchison saidNONMET the 1936 Act primarily envisagesMET a system where the local authority has a power and a duty to tryMET to secureMET that premises are not in a state which constitutesNONMET a statutory nuisance .
Action is initiatedMET by the service of an abatement notice requiringNONMET remedial work .
If the person in default failsNONMET to complyNONMET with an abatement notice the local authority is obliged to makeMET a complaint to the magistrates .
If the complaint is provedNONMET , a nuisance order is madeMET requiringNONMET the defendant to getMET the necessary work done .
Effectively the sequence is that the person in default is toldNONMET what is wrong and is requiredNONMET to putMET it right .
He is givenMET an opportunity to do so , and if he does not , he is subject to sanctions by the court to compelNONMET him to do so .
The problem arisesMET in connection with section 99 which adaptsMET or appliesMET the provisions to cases where an individual rather than the local authority wishesNONMET to makeMET the complaint .
Need he serveMET an abatement notice ?
The authorities plainly establishNONMET that he need not and can not do so .
Does that meanMET he may layMET an information and bringMET the matter before the magistrates without first puttingMET the person alleged to be in default on notice of what is alleged ?
The council arguedMET that a landlord , particularly one such as a local authority , can not realistically be expectedNONMET to have a system of inspection of all its premises and in practice is entitled to dependNONMET upon notification by its tenants .
For Mrs Bujok it was arguedNONMET that the 1936 Act was designedMET to secureMET in the interests of the community at large that statutory nuisances did not existNONMET .
It was submittedNONMET that an owner can not turnMET his back on his property because when he purchasesNONMET and >takes on the responsibility of letting , he knowsNONMET the property will in the course of time deteriorateNONMET .
He must therefore satisfyNONMET himself on a regular basis that it does not constituteNONMET a statutory nuisance .
In Warner v Lambeth London Borough Council ( 1985 ) 15 HLR 45 , 50 , Lord Justice Glidewell saidNONMET a private person could layMET an information allegingNONMET the failure to abateNONMET a statutory nuisance without first giving notice requiringNONMET abatement .
Therefore in the present case the justices cameMET to the correct conclusion .
His Lordship reachedMET that decision without enthusiasm because it seemedNONMET that as a matter of common sense , notice should be givenMET in such circumstances before criminal proceedings were launchedMET .
Lord Justice Watkins saidNONMET he agreedNONMET with reluctance .
It was surely repugnant to common sense that in this area of legal activity a local authority should be prosecutedNONMET by one of its tenants without first being givenMET the opportunity by that tenant to remedyNONMET the consequences of a neglect to repairNONMET the dwelling that the tenant occupiedNONMET .
In law there was no doubt that Mrs Bujok was entitled to commenceNONMET proceedings without givingMET notice of the state of the dwelling to the council .
But in every other conceivable way that action was entirely wrong .
Endless trouble to many people in courts and council offices and much money could be savedMET by the giving of notice of disrepair .
If the council did not reactMET to that notice , then would be the time for the tenant to exerciseMET the right to prosecuteNONMET .
Parliament should giveMET fresh thought to enactingMET a provision placingMET an obligation upon a council tenant to giveMET notice to the council before being permittedNONMET to commenceNONMET proceedings .
Appearances : John Cherryman QC instructedNONMET by Sherwood & Co for the council ; Elizabeth Norman instructedNONMET by Michael Arnold & Co , Oldbury , for Mrs Bujok .
Shiranikha Herbert barrister Leinster faceMET an uphill task .
By Robert Armstrong in Dublin THE ALL BLACKS beginNONMET the Irish leg of their 13-match tour at Lansdowne Road today against Leinster , who have never beatenMET a major touring side .
Leinster have namedNONMET a team that looksMET strong on paper , including eight internationals , yet they recently lostMET to both Munster and Ulster in the Inter-Provincial Championship .
Such is the mood of pessimism here it is hard to findNONMET anyone who believesNONMET the All Blacks , having wonNONMET their seven matches in Wales , will faceMET any significant threat during the next fortnight .
Ulster , the provincial champions , may well >fancyNONMET their >chances on November 21 , but Leinster look certain to faceMET an uphill struggle even though the tourists have restedNONMET 13 of the team that beatMET Wales .
Leinster will be hard pushedNONMET to keepMET the score within the respectable margins of defeat setMET by their predecessors .
In 1964 the All Blacks defeatedNONMET Leinster 11-5 , they wonNONMET 17-8 in 1972 and scraped home 8-3 in 1974 .
However , during the Eighties Irish provincial rugby has assumedNONMET a Third World status in relation to New Zealand's .
Leinster have been underminedMET by their failure to secureMET prestige fixtures since the mid-Seventies .
When New Zealand last touredNONMET Ireland in 1978 Leinster were ignoredMET .
The same thing happenedNONMET in 1984 when the province was deniedMET a fixture against the Wallabies .
Such neglect has done nothing for their confidence .
Even so , the All Blacks , who includeNONMET seven capped players , will giveMET today's opponents due respect .
As their coach , Alex Wyllie , remarkedNONMET : ‘ When we arrivedNONMET in Wales we were toldNONMET Cardiff were no damned good and lookMET how well they playedNONMET against us .
Leinster are quite capable of doing the same .
’ Wyllie is confident his Western Samoan wing , Va'aiga Tuigamala , will playNONMET although he is still niggledNONMET by an ankle injury received against Neath two weeks ago .
The Test flanker Alan Whetton , whose hamstring injury keptMET him out against Wales , will formMET a powerful back row with Kevin Schuler and the international No.8 , Zinzan Brooke .
The tourists will fieldNONMET four backs aged 21 or under .
For their part , Leinster are boostedMET by the presence of four players already selectedNONMET for Ireland to playNONMET New Zealand in Dublin on November 18 .
They are Brendan Mullin , the Lions centre , Fergus Aherne , the scrum-half , and the two new caps , Nick Popplewell at loose-head and Brian Smith , the fly-half .
No doubt Smith , the Oxford University Australian , who wonNONMET five caps for the Wallabies , will feelMET a bit closer to home facingMET the All Blacks twice in the next 11 days .
It will be fascinating to seeMET how Smith , a gifted all-round footballer , shapes up in his prospective international partnership with Aherne .
Equally intriguing will be the line-out performance of the young London Irish lock , Neil Francis , who has been left out  of the current Ireland squad .
Fortunately , Leinster's front five , which includesNONMET the experienced tight-head prop Des Fitzgerald , looksMET up to the task of scrummagingNONMET against the All Blacks .
However , real problems may ariseMET once Leinster attempt to winMET the loose ball .
Leinster will be ledMET by their third captain in as many matches , the centre Paul Clinch .
Leinster : F Dunlea ; J Sexton , P Clinch ( capt ) , B Mullin , P Purcell ; B Smith , F Aherne ; N Popplewell , N Kearney , D Fitzgerald , N Francis , B Rigney , P Kenny , K Leahy , A Blair .
All Blacks : M Ridge ; J Timu , B McCahill , W Little , V Tuigamala ; F Botica , B Deans ; G Purvis , W Gatland , S McDowell , I Jones , G Whetton ( capt ) , A Whetton , K Schuler , Z Brooke .
Figures of fun Open Space .. I WRITENONMET in response to Judith Raymont ( November 16 ) who wroteNONMET of the cartoon Men — A User's Guide , ‘ It is either insulting to men and should not be endorsedMET by publication , or it is witty and amusing , in which case we , as women , have no right to complainNONMET about equivalent portrayals of female stereotypes .
’ It does not matterNONMET if the cartoon is insulting to men .
The number of such cartoons is so small that , set against the insults to women broadcastNONMET by every newsagent and television channel , only a loony masculist would objectNONMET to them .
Before Raymont worksNONMET towards ‘ ways of showingMET respect , understanding and affection to members of the opposite sex ’ , she should realiseNONMET that the opposite sex's obsession with ‘ members ’ is a problem of enormous gravity .
There is nothing respectful , understanding or affectionate about page three .
W J Gaskill ( male ) East Kilbride IWOULD agreeNONMET that male and female stereotypes portrayedNONMET in cartoons are equally abhorrent , were it not for the fact that , whilst one pokesMET fun at a powerful group in society ( men ) , the other perpetuatesNONMET the oppression of a powerless group ( women ) .
In an ideal world , there would be no need for either , but for now I would rather seeMET the frustration expressedMET in these light-hearted >terms than in the sort of man- hating bitterness that has givenMET feminism such a bad name .
Natalie Ford Brighton MEN — A User's Guide is stupid , negative and insulting .
Am I , as a man , supposed to thinkNONMET that , if my body is hairy , it is ‘ thick and bestial ’ ?
Or that my mind , which I considerMET intelligent and creative , is occupiedMET only with sex , violence and car engines ?
Is this funny ?
What kind of hypocrisy allowsMET you to ( presumably ) condemnNONMET a similarly degrading portrayal of women , whilst makingMET your page a forum for this cartoon ?
Jim Conwell London NW3 PAGE wom Soccer : Littlewoods Cup , fourth round : Oldham Athletic 3 , Arsenal 1 Double by Ritchie endsNONMET 66-year wait .
By Stephen Bierley OLDHAM Athletic , who had never beatenMET a First Division side since they droppedMET into the Second Division in 1923 , made up for 66 years of not altogether patient waiting with a pulsating victory over the League champions Arsenal at Boundary Park last night .
The Pennines fairly shookMET .
No supporter of the Latics dared dreamMET it , but suddenly the improbable was a throbbing , joyous reality .
Two goals from the irrepressible Andy Ritchie , his 13th and 14th this season , and a third by the 20-year-old midfield player Nick Henry , and Arsenal were sunkMET with only the trace of a last-minute goal by Quinn .
Despite many and varied flurries of activity in the first 40 minutes , Arsenal seemedNONMET reasonably secure if not inspired .
They heldMET their line and competedNONMET hard in midfield , dampingMET down Oldham's initial verve and preparingMET themselves for more of the same in the second half .
Then Oldham struckMET .
Winterburn almost putNONMET the ball into his own net from Milligan's  cross , O'Leary recoveringMET an awkward situation .
Almost immediately Smith had an excellent chance for Arsenal but stumbledNONMET .
Oldham tookMET up the attack again and Barlow , who had a fine match at left- back , totally containingMET Rocastle , floated in a deep cross beyond Winterburn .
The predatory Ritchie chestedNONMET the ball down and hammeredMET a volley past Lukic .
Arsenal had no choice but to attackMET as soon as the second half beganMET .
A neat step-over by Rocastle sentMET Thomas hurtlingNONMET in on goal but Rhodes movedNONMET sharply off his line to smotherMET the shot .
From the resulting corner Rhodes madeMET another fine save , hurtlingNONMET to his right to deflectNONMET away Dixon's rising shot .
Finally , with Arsenal pressing hard , he clawedMET away Quinn's careful header from Thomas's drag-back .
Quinn heldNONMET his head in disbelief .
Worse , far worse was to followMET .
Bunn , who scoredMET six goals in the previous round against Scarborough , this time turned into the provider , puttingNONMET Milligan clear and free .
He was hauledNONMET back on the edge of the area by O'Leary , a ‘ professional ’ foul for which the Arsenal central defender was booked .
Holden's 64th-minute free-kick clatteredMET the wall and the ball fellNONMET to Henry , who drilledMET a low shot from more than 30 yards inside Lukic's right-hand post .
In another 10 minutes any remaining Oldham doubts were dispelledNONMET .
Ritchie passedNONMET to Irwin and then ranNONMET on to headNONMET the cross past Lukic .
Arsenal were stitchedMET and stuffedMET , with no question of a fluke .
Not for the first time this season their defence had been foundMET wanting and Oldham exploitedMET the weaknesses to the full , owingMET a special debt to the inspiration and tireless running of Henry and Milligan .
George Graham was not amused .
He calledNONMET his team's performance ‘ unacceptable ’ .
But he also saidNONMET : ‘ Let's not take any credit away from Oldham .
They were tremendous , and outplayedNONMET us in the first half .
The plastic pitch is no excuse .
We trainedNONMET on an artificial pitch for two days this week and we should have done a lot better .
’ Joe Royle , the Oldham manager , was full of praise both for Graham and his own team .
‘ George was brilliant , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ He could have blamedNONMET this and that but he saidNONMET we deservedNONMET it .
The manager's attitude showsMET why they are champions .
He tookMET it on the chin .
‘ One or two people will be ready to put this down to plastic but our goals were nothing to do with plastic .
This was a great performanc .
We rattledMET them from the first minute and didn't giveMET them any breathing space .
We were helter-skelter for 90 minutes and we scoredMET three great goals .
In the past we have had cup walks , not runs .
’ Oldham Athletic : Rhodes ; Irwin , Barlow , Henry , Barrett , Warhurst , Marshall , Ritchie , Bunn , Milligan , Holden .
Arsenal : Lukic ; Dixon , Winterburn , Thomas , O'Leary , Adams , Rocastle , Richardson , Smith , Quinn , Jonsson ( Groves , 65min ) .
Referee : R Gifford ( Llandradach ) .. Prototyping is crucial to systems development , arguesNONMET Ian Richards TailoredMET to fitMET .
IN SYSTEMS development nothing is more fundamental than assessing user requirements .
If you don't knowNONMET what the system is requiredNONMET to do ; you don't knowNONMET anything .
But many system developers are unable to assessMET requirements properly .
They seemNONMET to thinkNONMET that you can askNONMET a businessman what his requirements are and getMET an answer that amountsMET to a draft system specification .
A doctor doesn't ask his patient what treatment to prescribe .
The patient can explain only what the problem is .
It is the doctor that provides the remedy .
If you askNONMET a user what sort of system he wantsNONMET you will be metMET with a blank look .
A user may have a deep knowledge of business problems , but knowingNONMET little about computers , has no idea how they should be tackledMET .
Yet , analysts are heardNONMET askingNONMET time and again , ‘ TellNONMET me what you wantNONMET .
We've goneMET away from the days of systems imposedMET by the  data processing department , this is goingNONMET to be a system for the users .
’ But of course the users don't knowNONMET what they wantNONMET , so they end up gettingNONMET another duff system .
An effective analyst providesNONMET the same service to the business as the doctor provides to the patient .
He finds out what the needs of the business are , and prescribesMET the cure .
The user tellsNONMET the analyst what the problems are , and the analyst decidesNONMET , at least in broad terms , what the user requiresNONMET .
But the analyst has one great advantage over the doctor .
Once the user becomesNONMET familiar with the proposed system , helpful comments comeMET thick and fast .
‘ Oh , this will be of great help in orderingNONMET raw materials , but sometimes we getNONMET part deliveries , could we have an extra facility to dealMET with those ?
And sometimes non-standard discount is givenMET , a pig to dealMET with on the old system , but if you could addNONMET one extra input box on that screen there … And what about orders not deliveredNONMET on time ?
If we could listNONMET those we'd have advance warning of shortage problems on the assembly lines two months before they occurNONMET .
Now that would be a great leap forward .
’ Unfortunately you can not reachMET this stage until you have developedNONMET a prototype system .
And you can't developNONMET a prototype system because the users haven't gotMET a clue what they wantNONMET .
Most of them are probably muttering , ‘ I'm too busy to getNONMET involved in this sort of thing .
What's wrong with the old system anyway ?
’ The only way to developNONMET a prototype is for the analyst to getMET inside the head of the user and , thinkingNONMET like a user , decideNONMET what sort of system is requiredNONMET .
Of course , the initial system will not be perfect .
The analyst can not hopeNONMET to understandNONMET the business as well in a few weeks as the user does after many years .
But once the user seesMET the system , channels of communication will openMET .
Instead of persuadingNONMET the user to specifyNONMET requirements , the analyst will be drivenMET by the user to meetMET key needs .
Good system development goesMET through two distinct phases .
Initially the analyst does all the work , leadingMET the user towards a system he thinksNONMET is right for the business .
But once the user seesMET the potential of the system , a change in attitude takesMET place .
The process becomesNONMET demand drivenNONMET by the user .
The analyst is then forcedMET on the defensive , explainingNONMET why new features can not be includedNONMET because they are technically difficult or prohibitively expensive .
Traditionally , systems were validatedNONMET by users agreeingNONMET functional specifications .
In theory , validation meantMET that the user had readNONMET the specification , imaginedNONMET how the system would workMET in practice , and agreedNONMET the design .
It was only when usingNONMET a ‘ test ’ version of the system ( available just before the planned implementation date ) that difficulties would comeMET to light , and a host of change requests be issuedNONMET .
The advent of fourth generation languages ( 4GLs ) has madeMET system development much easier .
With a 4GL an initial prototype can be putMET together quickly .
This meansMET feedback is obtainedNONMET early in the development process , and the system can growMET around the user's requirements .
Crucial to the development process is the relationship builtMET up between the analyst and the user .
The best systems ariseMET when both have a deep understanding of each other's jobs .
Many developers use business analysts to ensureNONMET that the development team maintainMET a proper focus on business requirements .
But this can be counter-productive , as it cutsMET off communication between the systems analyst and the user .
Too much specialisation is bad for systems development ; it feedsMET the temptation to getNONMET engrossedNONMET in technical difficulties and forgetNONMET about the underlying business needs .
If you should strollNONMET into a pub and meetNONMET an analyst and a user talkingNONMET about work , and you can not tellMET one from the other , they have probably developedNONMET a successful system together .
Ian Richards ' book , How to UseNONMET a Computer to ImproveNONMET Your Business , has just been publishedNONMET by Graham & Trotman ( £8.95 paperback ; £16 hardback ) .
Tel : 01-821 1123 .
OVERNIGHT FILE Tiphook confident .
Container group Tiphook yesterday saidMET it was still confident of winningMET its joint £643million bid for Sea Containers even though the battle has swungMET towards James Sherwood's ferries-to-trailers combineNONMET .
The offer from the Anglo-Swedish consortium formedMET by Tiphook and Stena AB is the subject of an appeal in the Bermudan courts which is aimedMET at overturningMET an earlier ruling allowingMET SeaCo to proceedMET with its ‘ poison pill ’ defence .
Tiphook , which yesterday unveiledMET a 124 per cent increase in half year profits to £10million , hopesMET the court will blockMET SeaCo's purchases of its own shares .
Alternatively , it may be able to musterMET enough support from SeaCo shareholders to haltMET the current disposal of assets by Mr Sherwood for its bid with Stena to be fully consideredMET .
The cost of the bid to Tiphook is putMET at £2million , which it saysMET will have only a minor impact on full year results .
Increased demand for its road , rail and sea container fleets during the first half helpedMET boostMET the latest figures .
This flowedMET through to earnings per share , up a half at 19.6p and shareholders receiveNONMET a 25 per cent increase in the interim dividend to 2.7p .
The shares roseMET 9p to 443p .
Salvesen boost .
Christian Salvesen , the food process and distribution , generator hire and brick makingNONMET group , raised pre-tax profits by almost 21 per cent to £32.6million in the six months to September .
Aggreko generator hire , Salvesen's world market leader which providesNONMET power for customers from pop concerts to the oil industry , contributedMET strongly to a 37 per cent growth in trading profits in the industrial services division .
Oil slicks in Alaska and elsewhere helpedMET Vikoma , the group's environmental cleaning equipment manufacturer , which specialisesNONMET in separating oil from water , and although Salvesen brick , is suffering in the second half from a 30 to 40 per cent cut in demand as housebuilding nosedives , the first half was prosperous and full year trading profit should be on a level with 1988 , saysNONMET finance director Brian Fidler .
Almost a third of group profits are earnedNONMET overseas , interest and tax charges are down on last year and gearing stands at 13 per cent .
Capital spending of £43 million should reachMET a total of £87 million for the full year .
The shares roseMET 10p to 170p .
Avon treadsMET warily .
Shares in Avon Rubber have fallenMET sharply this year as a result of the weak demand for winter tyres and rights issue call to financeNONMET the move into US motor components .
The sale of most of the lossmaking tyre distribution business to Sumitomo , now also a minority shareholder in the only British-controlled tyremaker's plant , givesMET the board >confidence in some improvement this year , despite a poor immediate outlook for the motor producers .
Pre-tax profit fellMET £4.1million to £12.2 million in the year to September 30 , in line with the severely reduced expectations after the Cadillac Rubber acquisition and rights issue in July .
Turnover was heldMET at £228.6million , an rise of about £2million , by the earlier contribution from tyre distribution and the US replacement .
The final dividend goesNONMET up to 11.5p , makingMET 16.5p , against 14p for the year .
Earnings crashedMET by a third to 41p .
There was an extraordinary gain of £13.4 million , coveringMET the Motorway Tyres disposal and more rationalisation costs .
In short … WHESSOE sawMET pre-tax profit rise to £4.78 million , from £3.55 million , on sales of £58 million down from £100 million .
Earnings were level at 17.5p a share .
Dividends totalNONMET 5p , up a penny , with a 3.75p final .
BTP's enlarged specialist chemicals activities boosted turnover to £60.1million , from £44.8million , in the September half and profit roseMET to £9.6 million from £5.6 million , including an exceptional £3.1 million , from the Rizzi engineering sale in Italy .
Earnings without such gains were 1.9p higher at 6.8p a share .
The interim dividend is 2.75p , a rise of 10 per cent .
NORCROS , the property , building materials and printing group , sawMET profits crashMET from £29million to £18.3million .
However , the City had been expectingMET bad figures and the shares roseMET 15p to 239p .
HARDANGER , the retail property developer , postedMET pre-tax profits up £1.3million to £8.37million .
The final dividend is 26.5p , makingNONMET a total of 37.5p , against 30p .
CRYSTALATE , the electronics product group , experiencedMET a ‘ serious disappointment ’ in the second half and hence profits fellMET from £5.6million to £2.9million in the year to September .
The markets .
Kingfisher's £461million bid for Dixon's ledMET to a resurgence of speculative activity yesterday .
Dixons ' shares jumpedMET to 153p in early trading but endedMET the day at 141p , a 22p rise .
Other recently depressed stores , and companies with businesses similar to Dixons , roseMET in sympathy .
Gus A were particularly prominent at 1118p , up 28p ahead of today's interim figure .
Properties continued to shineMET as British Land producedMET a complicated scheme to releaseMET the value of its property portfolio .
British Land closed at 405p , a net gain of 48p .
Hammerson shotMET up 45p to 855p in sympathy .
Tokyo : Nikkei index : 37,654.29 ( 37,494.17 ) .
Hong Kong : Hang Seng index : 2,756.39 ( 2,764.44 ) .
Frankfurt : FAZNONMET index : 695.74 ( 684.01 ) .
Paris : CAC index : 542.6 ( 543.8 ) .
PAGE Edoardo Amaldi .
Ragazzi of distinction : .
IN December , 1943 , the men workingNONMET feverishly to createNONMET the first American atomic bomb sentNONMET a team of ‘ spooks ’ to Naples .
One of their main assignments was to contactNONMET Edoardo Amaldi , a physicist thoughtNONMET to be in hidingNONMET near Rome .
Six months later , the day before Rome's liberation by the Allies , Amaldi was foundNONMET .
He was interviewedNONMET by Moe Berg , then one of the most famous baseball players in America .
Berg was also an agent of the Office of Strategic Services , which was later to giveMET birth to the CIA .
His job was to convinceNONMET Amaldi to packMET his bags because there was a ship waitingMET at Naples to takeMET him to the United States .
Amaldi's presence there had been soughtNONMET by two other Italian colleagues , also physicists .
His mentor , Enrico Fermi , later to be calledNONMET ‘ the father of the bomb ’ , and Emilio Segre ( who diedNONMET in California earlier this year ) .
Amaldi dodgedMET the American invitation , perhaps because ( with Rome liberated ) Fermi's mantle in physics had fallenMET on his young shoulders and there were younger minds to teachMET .
He woreMET that mantle well at Rome University until his retirement in 1978 .
But Amaldi never really retired nor grewNONMET old .
He keptMET regular hours in the university's physics building , spokeNONMET at scientific meetings this year in Moscow and Washington .
As President of the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei he had deliveredMET the welcoming address on Tuesday to a symposium of scientists .
He then orderedNONMET a car to callMET for him the next morning for a similar occasion and was felledMET by a stroke while waitingNONMET for the lift .
Amaldi grew up in a small town in Lombardy , and tookMET his doctorate in physics from Rome at the remarkably early age of 21 .
In 1929 , he becameNONMET one of the ragazzi di Via Panisperna — the street where Fermi's ‘ kids ’ carried out their own experiments under the master in their own under-financedNONMET lab .
Emilio Segre was one kid , and Bruno Pontecorvo , later to defectNONMET from Britain to the Soviet Union , another .
It is interesting to noteMET that the ‘ pope ’ — as the kids called Fermi — ‘ because he's always right ’ , was only seven years older than Amaldi .
Amaldi astoundedMET his group in October 1934 with his discovery that by slowing down , rather than accelerating , neutrons , he could provokeMET intense nuclear reactions .
He heldMET a chair in physics from 1937 until his retirement publishing more than 150 papers on atomic and nuclear physics .
He was awardedMET honorary degrees by Algiers , Glasgow and Oxford .
He becameNONMET a founder , and active executive , of the European Centre for Nuclear Research in Geneva .
I had the pleasure of two long talks last year with Professor Amaldi about his knowledge of what the German physicists were doing with their atoms during the war years .
Apart for his incongruously white hair , Amaldi seemedNONMET to have the mental lucidity and expected energy of a man half his age .
His modesty , consideringNONMET his world-wide fame in his field , was endearing .
I knewNONMET almost nothing about physics but we sharedMET some jokes about the Rome telephone system .
In 1949 , Amaldi wroteNONMET to the Italian prime minister askingMET for permission to produceNONMET and sellNONMET sealing wax for letters , ‘ so that we may raiseMET neededNONMET funds for our physics lab ’ .
The reply cameMET from an under-secretary who saidMET that the present funding was consideredNONMET adequate and the commercial undertaking would be ill-advised .
It was signedNONMET by Giulio Andreotti , the present prime minister .
George Armstrong Edoardo Amaldi , born Carpaneto Piacentino September 5 , 1908 ; diedNONMET Rome , December 5 , 1989 .
Midwife at the birth of a state .
THE INTIFADA is a people's unarmed revolution against occupation .
Its two main slogans , repeatedNONMET countless times in the directives issuedMET by the underground leadership , are freedom and independence .
It has employedMET a dual strategy to achieveNONMET these two objectives .
First , a comprehensive civil disobedience campaign was begunNONMET by which people severed , or minimised , all the contact points by which they were boundMET to the Israeli occupation authority .
This campaign includedNONMET resignations of Palestinian officials from public posts , the boycott of Israeli goods and products , and the refusal to payNONMET taxes and fines .
Partial and full strikes , demonstrations , sit-ins , conventions … all these have in fact only constituted the outer layer of an inner mechanism of civilian rebellion .
The second , and complementary , part of the Intifada strategy concentrated on the construction of an indigenous national authority .
As Israel's authority was being liftedMET , the population beganNONMET  creatingNONMET an alternative authority of their own .
Popular committees were establishedNONMET in villages , refugee camps , suburbs , streets , in fact in every community .
Some headway was madeMET in expanding self-sufficiency , whether through utilisingNONMET more land for agriculture , developing home economies , or encouraging local manufacturers and products .
Villages and refugee camps were thus being  developedNONMET into ‘ liberated ’ or ‘ independent ’ areas , if not militarily , then at least psychologically , politically and infrastructurally .
Bloody clashes would occurNONMET whenever armoured units raidedNONMET these villages , stormingNONMET through makeshift defensive road blocks and respondingMET to rocks being thrownNONMET with live bullets and tear gas ; but no sooner would these army units be goneMET than authority would revertNONMET to the village residents .
Palestinian flags would be raisedNONMET on minarets and church spires , road blocks would again be erectedNONMET , and life in all its aspects would once again be runMET by the local leadership .
The structure of the developing national authority has been both diffuse enough to preventNONMET it from being destroyedMET by any one single sweep of arrests ( there have been more than 50,000 arrests since the Intifada's outbreak ) , and coherent enough to allowMET for the existence of a unified resistance strategy .
While the entire network of popular committees , local institutions and the general public constitute the field commanders in the battle of civilian disobedience and of constructingMET a political infrastructure , a rotating Unified National Command acts in the role of field-general , issuingNONMET a bi-monthly directive outliningMET policy and determining specific resistance programmes .
A high level of mobility in the structure allowsMET for continuous interchange of roles and ideas , and retainsMET for the Unified National Command the closeness to grass roots that is requiredNONMET to makeMET it truly reflectMET people's wishes and sentiments .
THIS expanded network of popular committees and institutions makingMET up the Unified leadership is infusedMET by tens of thousands of activists who belongMET to , or identifyMET with , the different factions of the PLO .
In effect , therefore , the PLO existsMET at all levels of organisation within the occupied territories .
Thus the Palestinian national movement both inside and outside the occupied territories is an organic whole .
The pattern of the Intifada has been cyclical .
Thrusts of resistance ( mass demonstrations , resignations , tax rebellions , etc ) would comeMET in crests .
The pattern is determinedNONMET by a wide variety of factors , including what the Israeli army does .
But the relation is complex , not uni- directional .
Harsh measures — puttingMET an entire community under an absolute curfew for a continuous lengthy period of time , demolishingNONMET homes , uprootingNONMET olive or citrus trees , physical intimidation and terror  tactics employedMET by raiding army units , shooting , killingNONMET , cuttingMET off water or electricity supplies and telephone links to villages or towns , mass arrests , intimidatory interrogation techniques — can either  createNONMET a temporary lull or activateMET an eruption .
The army never knowsMET which it will be .
It is as if it is walking through a minefield .
The wave like pattern of the Intifada , its pains and sufferings , are all reminiscent of the process of birth .
The metaphor is apt , as Palestinians regardMET themselves as engaging in a process of givingMET birth to their independent Palestinian state .
Through their revolution , the masses are both mother and midwife to the birth of this state .
The Intifada is the midwife of freedom .
Through it , Palestinians are strugglingMET on a daily basis to shakeMET off Israel's authority and to constructMET their own .
The struggle reflectsMET a revolution in mass consciousness , by which people have comeMET to realiseNONMET that ideas and aspirations must be embodiedNONMET in manifest acts if reality is to be changedMET .
Thus , wherever one looksMET , one findsMET people engaged in the construction of the blocks that will makeMET up the Palestinian state .
It is a conscious effort .
The masses are being engagedNONMET in the craft of state- masonry .
In this process of state building , many stages have been coveredMET .
The Declaration of Independence issuedMET by the Palestine National Council ( PNC ) on November 15 last year constitutesNONMET a major landmark along this road .
Its significance lies in its double message : that the aim of the Palestinian struggle is the establishment of Palestinian independence , and that this independence is regardedMET as being not at Israel's expense .
This has been a constant theme of Intifada policy : that we wishNONMET to buildMET ( Palestine ) , not to destroyMET ( Israel ) ; that we wishNONMET to achieveNONMET freedom ( for our people ) , not to depriveNONMET others ( Israelis ) of it ; that we wishNONMET to protectNONMET and saveNONMET lives ( ours ) , not to endangerNONMET the lives of others ( Israelis ) .
In one of several Intifada leaflets writtenNONMET in Hebrew and addressed to the Israeli soldiers on duty in the occupied territories , the message was repeatedNONMET : Soldier , goNONMET home .
Return to your family and children .
Be with them in peace so that we may remainNONMET with our family and children in peace .
We do not wishNONMET to harmMET you , or your state .
We wishNONMET to be unharmed , in our own state .
How can the process of state building be developedNONMET ?
If the PNC Declaration of Independence constitutedNONMET a major landmark in this process , the time has comeMET to embarkMET on another major step , that of declaringMET the setting up of a state or government structure .
AN ESCALATION of the Intifada in this direction would serveMET two purposes at once .
First , it would consolidateMET the structures of the developing national authority which is competing to replaceMET the occupation authority .
Second , it would consolidateMET the image and essence of the Intifada as a constructive , not a destructive , force .
Naturally , to embarkMET on such a step is not necessarily to succeedNONMET immediately in realisingNONMET it .
Rather , it is a challenge .
It will be a further challenge to Israel's occupation , conceived in the image of earlier challenges of the Intifada .
But it will also be a challenge to us , Palestinians , summoningMET us to workNONMET more energetically towards the idea's fulfilment .
It would be a natural extension of the Intifada's dual strategy towards disengagement from Israel , and the corresponding process of state building .
It would further naturaliseMET and legitimiseNONMET the evolving skeletal form of Palestinian independence .
It would provideNONMET the multitudinous popular committees and activities with a more advanced form of organisation and structure .
It would enableNONMET better planning and performance .
It would maximiseMET civilian tactics of resistance and defuseMET the natural potential for violence , containingMET and eventually eliminatingNONMET the marginal but intrusive phenomenon of collaborator activation by Israeli security authorities and collaborator execution by local Palestinians .
It would createNONMET a further fact that would putMET Israel on the spot .
Israel's reaction , however hostile , could only further our cause .
Arresting or deportingNONMET the tens of thousands of Palestinian professionals who would be employedNONMET in perfectly apolitical , harmless and humanitarian jobs can only further isolateMET the Israeli Government .
Half-way measures can only implyMET half-way success .
A modus vivendi would also implyMET success .
In general , our policy should be to proceedMET with buildingMET our state block by block , without waitingNONMET to be givenMET a gift of it through negotiations .
We should regardMET negotiations rather as the means by which we could establishNONMET formal agreements between our state and Israel .
Such agreements can rangeMET from the issue of borders to the issue of free wave-lengths for our future television and radio networks .
In the meantime , we have the capacity to bringMET coherence and organisation to a whole range of activities , further consolidatingNONMET the institutional linkage between the people in the occupied state and the PLO leadership .
Entire departments can be setMET up , in health , foreign affairs , agriculture , trade , finance , education , justice , religion , information and social welfare .
A pyramid administrative structure , establishingNONMET links from popular committees in villages right up to the Executive Committee of the PLO ( in its capacity as a Cabinet ) , can be establishedNONMET .
During the Intifada the people have been engagedMET in buildingMET the side walls .
A government would provideNONMET the roof which would bringMET these walls together .
It would addMET another necessary touch in the process of creatingNONMET a Palestinian home .
Sari Nusseibeh , a leading Palestinian intellectual , is professor of philosophy at Bir Zeit , the West Bank university closed by the Israelis early last year .
His ideas are widely influential among Palestinians .
Nusseibeh … ‘ The Palestinian national movement inside and outside the occupied territories is an organic whole ’ PHOTOGRAPH : DAVID SILLITOE The day thrift turned into a nightmare .
By Daniel John GEORGE Tyson is not a gambling man nor does he takeMET unnecessary risks .
He doesn't smokeNONMET or drinkNONMET , and even if he wantedNONMET to , two heart attacks and a by-pass operation have madeMET the decision for him .
By his own account , Mr Tyson is thrifty and statesNONMET quite proudly that neither he or his wife Rosie are a burden on any form of social or government support .
But that is why , at the age of 68 , Mr Tyson is not enjoyingNONMET what he had hopedNONMET would be a comfortable retirement .
A life of saving had , by 1985 , givenMET them a small nest-egg of £15,000 on which the interest would helpMET supplementNONMET their pensions .
To the Tysons , that meantMET nothing extravagant — just an extra £135 a month to makeMET life at home in South Ruislip , Middlesex easier .
That money was investedNONMET as might be expectedNONMET of the Tysons .
And for three years , it earnedMET its return , every month .
Until one morning in June 1988 when George Tyson turned on the radio to hearNONMET a small , investment business calledNONMET Barlow Clowes had collapsedMET .
‘ It was about 8.30am and I was just gettingNONMET dressedNONMET when it cameMET over on the news , ’ saidNONMET Mr Tyson , a former clerk of works at Harrow council , London .
Investors in Barlow Clowes since 1985 , the Tysons had orginally putMET £10,000 into the UK fund and £5,000 in Gibraltar-based Barlow Clowes International ( BCI ) .
Fate determinedNONMET that a short while before the businesses failed , they transferredMET the £10,000 to BCI because of the better returns being offeredNONMET .
In the days that followedMET , the Tysons foundMET that they and 18,000 other investors had been the victims of a financial crash of global proportions .
Of the £190million investedNONMET in both funds , BCI investors facedMET a shortfall of up to £100million .
After the initial shock and disbelief , the Tysons grewNONMET angry — at the advisers who convincedNONMET them about Barlow Clowes , at the Midland bank manager who gaveMET verbal assurances of its security , at the regulatory authorities responsible for the investment community and at the Department of Trade and Industry which allowedMET the company to tradeNONMET .
‘ I feltMET it was so safe , they were so professional , ’ saidNONMET Mr Tyson .
‘ I feelMET appalled by the way these professional guardians have treatedNONMET us .
If you were a gambling man it would not affectNONMET you , it would just be lostMET .
But this was not a gamble .
’ Like so many investors , Mr Tyson foundMET himself having to go back to workNONMET to easeMET the financial strain he had hopedNONMET to avoidMET .
Ironically , it was the Government which he partly blamedNONMET for the affair that gaveMET him the chance to returnMET to work after retirement .
A change in the tax rules affecting pensions was shortly followedMET by a job with the Department of Environment's Property Services Agency , a post which carries him through to March and may seeMET him stayMET until he is 70 .
PuttingMET it as politely as he can , Mr Tyson saidNONMET the whole affair ‘ encouragedMET ’ him to returnMET to paid employment .
‘ I hadn't plannedMET to workNONMET at all .
’ And like all of the other investors , he and his wife were in a quandry .
They wantedNONMET to do something but feltMET powerless .
Pursuing legal action would have costNONMET them money they didn't have ( unless it meantMET sellingNONMET their house which was not an option ) but doing nothing leftMET them with the feeling that justice wasn't being done .
So they compromisedNONMET and gaveNONMET £100 to the Barlow Clowes Investors Group which was formedMET last July to representMET the investors ' interests and co-ordinateMET the fight for compensation .
That , saysNONMET Mr Tyson , has been their only blessing .
‘ They are dedicated people who clearly knowNONMET what they are talkingMET about and have guidedMET us through it .
Those people are victims , too , but they have certainly keptMET us together .
’ That aside , the last year has broughtMET little respite from their own , very personal , crisis .
The Tysons have yet to >seeNONMET any cash payment from the liquidators who have been windingMET up BCI's affairs .
What little money has been recoveredNONMET remainsNONMET the subject of a legal tussle in the courts which may yet takeMET months to resolveNONMET .
They have been toldNONMET that their claim may only amountNONMET to around £11,000 of their £15,000 as capital gains tax is likely to be deductedNONMET from the total .
But until they get any money back , the Tysons findMET themselves in the position of the gambler who gambledMET all and lostMET .
Except that the Tysons don't gambleMET .
The boy and the dog skirtedNONMET round opposite sides of the puddle , the boy , a light , tall fourteen-year-old , labouringMET in wellington boots too large for him , and the dog , a three-year-old Labrador bitch , pickingMET her way reluctantly , with frequent pauses , as if her paws hurtNONMET .
The boy , unlike the dog , knewNONMET that the mud did not goMET on for ever ; beyond the bridge , the disused railway embankment along which they were walking becameNONMET builtNONMET up , so that water ranMET off it .
He pulledNONMET the dog close to him to letNONMET a mixed string of horses and Ponies goNONMET past , wavingNONMET shyly to the lead rider , a pretty , capable girl an unbridgeable two years older than him .
He watchedNONMET her as she wentNONMET past at a walk , the black Labrador and he both gazingNONMET wistfully , their breath steamingNONMET in the cold February morning .
He waitedNONMET till the horses were well away and looked round the wide , flat landscape carefully before unclippingNONMET the lead .
‘ Way you goNONMET , Patty , ’ he saidNONMET softly , and the dog was off , hurlingMET herself along the embankment , all paws and flying ears , after a rabbit who had been sittingMET in a patch of sun but disappearedNONMET with contemptuous ease as she cameNONMET close .
The boy had been toldNONMET unequivocally not to letNONMET her off the lead — the riding-school only used the land by grace of its owner and it was a shooting estate — but he hatedNONMET keepingNONMET the dog strainingNONMET at the lead and knewNONMET that she would always comeNONMET to his call .
He stoodNONMET for a moment laughingNONMET at her as she castMET furiously for the vanished rabbit , and walkedNONMET on , to catchMET her up , along the raised embankment .
The trees had grownMET up beside it in the twenty-five years since the railway had closedMET , and the boy stoppedNONMET every now and then to watchNONMET small birds hoppingNONMET around the top branches .
He particularly likedNONMET this stretch ; nothing but the odd tractor and the horses ever cameNONMET down this embankment , and the birds were unworried by his presence .
After half a mile he decidedNONMET to turnNONMET off the embankment and walk up the side of the next field and along the path at the top of it , followingNONMET the horses whom he could still seeNONMET in the distance .
He calledNONMET Patty to him .
She didn't comeNONMET , which was surprising ; she was a docile creature and particularly devoted to him because he always tookNONMET her for a walk when he was at the stables .
He could hearNONMET her barking and lookedNONMET down over the steep side of the embankment to the bottom of the trees .
He calledNONMET her again and again , but she would not stop barkingNONMET at something he could not seeNONMET .
Probably a squirrel , he decidedNONMET , and slitheredMET down the side of the embankment to joinMET her , scoldingNONMET as he wentNONMET .
StraighteningNONMET up beside the dog , he lookedNONMET where she was lookingNONMET , and blinkedNONMET .
He sawNONMET a leg , uncomfortably wedgedNONMET between sapling trees , swollen grotesquely , and gazedMET at it , stupidly , wondering if it was plastic .
As his eyes focusedNONMET he realizedNONMET he was lookingNONMET at a hideously swollen human body , and just then , as the light breeze shifted , he caughtMET the stomach- turning odour of decay .
He was a sensible and capable boy , an eldest child , so he movedNONMET closer , tryingNONMET not to breatheNONMET , and stoodNONMET steadfastly lookingNONMET until he was confident of what he had seenNONMET : a body , must be a girl because it was wearingNONMET a skirt , lyingNONMET face down , head towards the bottom of the embankment as if she had divedNONMET off the top .
He clippedNONMET the lead on to the dog with cold hands which would hardly functionNONMET , and letNONMET her pullNONMET him up the slope as fast as he could makeMET his legs moveNONMET .
He stoppedNONMET on the embankment , shakingNONMET with cold and shock , to noteMET the spot , then fledNONMET along the tractor paths , the dog running with him , to the stables where the ten o'clock children's ride was in its closing stages .
‘ Miss Williams !
’ ‘ Jamie , I'm teachingNONMET .
’ The thin , capable woman who was takingMET the riding-class looked at him in amazement as he leanedNONMET pantingNONMET on the gate to the ring , the dog whiningMET beside him .
‘ I'm sorry .
Please , I've foundNONMET something , I must tellNONMET you .
She had knownNONMET him since he was a very small five-year-old , perchedMET like a mosquito on one of the placid beginners ' ponies , so she toldNONMET the class to carryNONMET on walkingNONMET their ponies while she cameNONMET to him .
‘ There's someone dead .
Below the railway embankment .
’ ‘ Are you sure ?
’ The boy lookedNONMET at her and uncontrollable tears suddenly filled his eyes .
He was very nearly as tall as her , but she putNONMET an arm under his shoulders and supportedNONMET him to the untidy room which servedMET as the stable office , callingNONMET to one of the stable girls to takeNONMET over the class .
‘ Patty foundNONMET her .
She's just lyingNONMET there , but she is dead .
’ He scrubbedNONMET at his face with the handkerchief she offeredNONMET and gulpedMET for air .
‘ I'll ringNONMET the police .
’ She did so , castingMET an experienced eye over him .
‘ SitNONMET down here , Jamie , and I'll makeNONMET some tea .
Mummy will comeNONMET back in a few minutes , won't she , for Susie ?
’ ‘ Not Mummy .
Aunt Margaret is comingNONMET at ten .
’ The boy thought longingly of his mother , but managedNONMET to helpNONMET Miss Williams describeNONMET the location of the body to a startled local station sergeant and to drinkNONMET a cup of sweet milky tea without being sick .
By the time his aunt arrivedNONMET Jamie was so far recoveredNONMET as to be able to refuseNONMET to goNONMET home and to pointMET out , severely , that he would be neededNONMET , either to assistNONMET the police or to be leadNONMET rider in the eleven-thirty class , or possibly both .
He watchedNONMET his aunt and Miss Williams wordlessly consultNONMET each other , but knewNONMET his aunt would do as she was toldNONMET ; successful solicitor though she was , she was ten years younger than Miss Williams and , as she complainedNONMET , totally intimidated by her as she had not been by anyone since her late headmistress .
He was unsurprised to findNONMET her packed off firmly to takeNONMET his sister home , leavingNONMET him as a person of major importance in what he instantly assumedMET to be a real murder .
Miss Williams tookNONMET him to meetNONMET the police Land Rover at the stable gate , a bone-thin , wiry woman in her late fifties , her expression sufficiently forbidding to preventNONMET the parents , edgingMET cars through the gate to collectMET children from the ten o'clock ride , from askingNONMET any questions .
Jamie , through a renewed queasiness , just observed that the police driver was instantly reducedNONMET to half his age by Miss Williams's greeting .
‘ He was one of my boys , ’ she saidNONMET in explanation to the CID sergeant who was leadingMET the party as they bumpedNONMET over the rough road , through the thick mud and on to the dry embankment .
‘ Like Jamie here .
’ ‘ Did you recognizeNONMET the person you foundNONMET , young man ?
’ the sergeant askedNONMET , carefully .
‘ No .
’ Tears startedNONMET into Jamie's eyes .
‘ She was all swollen .
’ The sergeant's eyes widened , and he slidNONMET out of the Land Rover and stood back to letNONMET Jamie out .
‘ Very competent boy .
Almost a professional singer , handlesMET himself very well .
’ Miss Williams's natural pitch , well suitedNONMET to reachingMET across a hunting-field , was discreetly reducedMET .
The CID sergeant thankedNONMET her gravely and wentNONMET to standNONMET beside Jamie who was peeringNONMET down the embankment , lookingNONMET pinched .
‘ We'll goNONMET down together , lad .
’ ‘ There isn't room .
I'll leadNONMET .
’ He tookMET a deep breath and headedNONMET down , the sergeant , two constables and Miss Williams in his wake .
Soon they all stoodNONMET side by side , one of the younger policemen coughingNONMET involuntarily .
‘ Oh dear , oh dear , ’ Miss Williams saidNONMET on an indrawn breath .
‘ Sorry .
ComeNONMET along , Jamie , let's getNONMET you back .
’ She tookNONMET out a handkerchief and moppedMET her eyes .
The police driver shotMET Jamie a look of enquiry which he missedMET , occupiedMET as he was with guiding Miss Williams back up the hill .
He had seenNONMET her weep before but only for a sick horse , and he was awe-struck .
‘ Jamie , did you letNONMET Patty off the lead ?
’ The boy blushedNONMET to his ears and owned to it .
‘ You must not do it , Jamie , we'll be in trouble with Colonel James , I've toldNONMET all you boys a thousand times .
’ ‘ He'll perhaps not do it again , ’ the sergeant murmuredNONMET , and receivedNONMET the look that Miss Williams habitually bentMET on a child who was ridingNONMET carelessly .
‘ How long had she been there ?
’ Jamie askedNONMET , anxiously .
‘ A few days , ’ the sergeant saidNONMET , grimly .
‘ How many ?
’ ‘ Doctor'll tellNONMET us .
’ He consideredNONMET the boy thoughtfully , and decidedNONMET to takeNONMET him back quickly .
These teenagers were in his experience a lot less tough than they lookedNONMET .
‘ Any idea who it could be ?
’ he askedNONMET Miss Williams casually .
‘ No .
But only a local would knowNONMET to putNONMET a body there .
If Jamie hadn't letNONMET the dog off the lead she could have been there much longer .
’ The sergeant noddedNONMET , decidingNONMET it could do no harm to concedeMET a point he had already takenMET .
‘ No one could tellMET who she was , surely ?
’ Miss Williams saidNONMET quietly to him , soundingNONMET shaky .
‘ She didn't even lookNONMET human .
’ The sergeant confirmedMET that that happenedNONMET with bodies after a few days .
‘ We'll identifyNONMET her , though , ’ he saidNONMET , reassuringly .
‘ Somebody will likely have reportedNONMET her missing .
’ He stoppedNONMET , abruptly , as he rememberedNONMET a conversation earlier that week , and litMET a cigarette , thinkingNONMET furiously .
This could be the girl whom the Yard were lookingNONMET for , and he had better do everything very quickly indeed , including findingNONMET his Chief , who would then wantNONMET to findNONMET his Chief Constable and notifyNONMET Scotland Yard .
Presumably it would be the Yard who investigatedNONMET this one , rather than the regional crime squad .
He chewedNONMET his thumbnail as he walkedNONMET , out of long experience keepingMET in mind the highest priorities : EnsureNONMET Body Not MovedNONMET and EnsureNONMET Next of Kin Notified before the Press gotMET the story .
He postedNONMET the detective constable he had with him back down the path to joinMET his colleague , armed with instructions to repelMET all attempts by anyone , however senior or armed with whatever authority , to goNONMET anywhere near the body unless he , Sergeant Black , personally accompanied them .
Then he climbedNONMET into the Land Rover beside his two passengers and droveNONMET off fast , with the aim of abandoningNONMET Jamie to the custody of his aunt as quickly as possible .
He could seeNONMET with half an eye that the kid's aunt was goingNONMET to be one of the confident , bossy , well- connected women with whom that part of Cambridgeshire was substantially over-MET .
John McLeish was in his office , Saturday or no Saturday , tellingNONMET himself he neededNONMET to catchMET up on the paperwork .
The phone rangNONMET and he pickedNONMET it up , frowningNONMET .
One of the pleasures of Saturday working was that the phone did not ringNONMET all the time .
The voice at the other end was plainly over-excited and it tookMET him a minute to disentangleMET what he was being toldNONMET .
‘ Oh congratulations , Charlie .
Sorry , what did you sayNONMET it was again ?
’ ‘ A little girl .
Actually a very big girl as these things goMET , nine pounds .
It's fantastic , John , there she is , a new person , lyingNONMET on her face , sound asleep .
I've just leftNONMET them and I'm goingNONMET back .
’ McLeish repressedNONMET the malicious thought that this event might putNONMET Francesca's nose just a little bit out of joint .
She had been utterly secure in her position as the only girl in the Wilson family and now there was another one .
‘ I've gotNONMET another bit of good news .
Frannie's goingNONMET to be able to bringNONMET Tristram home pretty soon , apparently .
’ McLeish expressedNONMET qualified enthusiasm and Charlie assuredNONMET him he feltMET exactly the same about his younger brother .
‘ The difficulty is that Perry does everything that bitMET better than Tristram .
Not that this is any excuse , John , I do knowNONMET .
’ He pausedNONMET , reminding McLeish irresistibly of a Labrador wondering how best to approach an acquaintance .
‘ I wantedNONMET to sayNONMET , you seeMET , that I knowNONMET you thoughtNONMET Frannie shouldn't have goneNONMET , and that it's ruinedNONMET your holiday plans , and , on behalf of us all , I'm sorry .
I knowNONMET the little boys leanMET on her too much and I would have goneNONMET if I could .
’ He coughedNONMET , embarrassed and a little pompous , very much conscious of his new status as a father , while McLeish rememberedNONMET that he was a scant four years older than the delinquent Tristram .
‘ Anyway she should be back soon , ’ Charlie concludedNONMET .
McLeish thankedNONMET him gravely , feeling , as he often did with the Wilsons , that he was being envelopedMET in a large feather eiderdown , and , madeMET restless by the call , wentNONMET down the corridor to where he knewNONMET Catherine Crane was also in , gettingMET her office in order .
He stoppedNONMET at the door and smiledNONMET at her .
WearingNONMET jeans and a blue shirt , she was tuggingNONMET at a filing cabinet which was too large for her to embraceMET and which was threateningMET to over-balanceMET on her .
She lookedNONMET about sixteen and beautiful .
She letMET goMET of the cabinet , coughingNONMET in the dust of ages that appearedMET to be lurking behind it , and smiledNONMET back at him as the February sun shoneNONMET through the small window behind her , throwingMET into sharp relief the patches on the wall where her predecessor had hungNONMET posters , and the ingrained dirt on the flaking paintwork round the mean , narrow , metal window .
‘ Where do you wantNONMET that putNONMET ?
’ McLeish advancedNONMET on the cabinet and shiftedNONMET it authoritatively , ignoringNONMET the clip on the ankle dealtNONMET him by an unsecured bottom drawer apparently full of bricks .
‘ I should have unloadedNONMET it first , ’ Catherine Crane saidNONMET , apologetically , ‘ but I just couldn't moveNONMET in any direction with it where it was .
’ ‘ I'm here , just tellNONMET me if you wantNONMET anything else shiftedNONMET .
’ He hesitatedNONMET .
‘ I'm goingNONMET to do another hour , then have some lunch , if you wantNONMET to comeNONMET ?
’ He was aware that he was not managing to soundNONMET exactly like a senior officer makingNONMET a recent arrival feelMET at home , but decidedNONMET not to addMET any further riders to his invitation .
‘ That would be very nice .
Are we goingNONMET to the canteen ?
’ ‘ Not if I can helpNONMET it .
What about the pub ?
‘ If I'm allowedNONMET to buyNONMET my own .
’ McLeish consideredNONMET .
‘ That's fine on the food — I'll buyNONMET the drinks , I'm too old to getNONMET used to women buyingNONMET my drinks .
’ She laughedNONMET at him and saidNONMET gravely that she would be happy to indulgeNONMET him , and he wentNONMET away , grinning .
Peter Yeo was also in his office , having toldNONMET his wife he was lunchingNONMET with a client .
It was , he feltMET , just too difficult to be at home at all , with Claudia in a permanently bitchy mood and both his teenage children takingMET their cue from her and behavingNONMET intolerably .
He wanderedNONMET restlessly about , and decidedNONMET that the lie might as well becomeMET the truth .
Without Angela Morgan , at least two major clients were in danger of not gettingMET the assiduous service they were payingNONMET for , and it would be well worth tryingNONMET to seeMET if one of them , whom he knewNONMET to be a fellow refugee from family life at the weekends , could be foundNONMET .
He was in luck , and fixed to meetNONMET Andy Barton at Brazzo's where Yeo Davis had a table permanently bookedMET .
He had to admitMET that this particular client hardly addedMET to the general decorative smartness of the place .
Andy Barton , founder and chief executive of Barton Textiles , was almost as broad as he was long , virtually neckless , with incongruously long brown hair curling over his collar .
His enormous hands dwarfedNONMET the elegant menu which he was studyingNONMET in apparent disbelief , and Peter Yeo noticedNONMET again , as Barton without rising extended one massive paw , that though the fingers were an ordinary length it was the width of the palms that madeMET the hands so large .
‘ I never seeMET how they getMET the sales per square foot in these places , ’ Barton observedMET , without further greeting .
‘ I meanNONMET , they're not open twelve hours like my shops , and they aren't usingMET the space .
’ His small bright blue eyes swept disparagingly over the minimalized black and white flooring , stainless steel chairs and black wooden bar .
‘ They makeMET a huge margin on a smaller turnover , Andy , out of punters like us .
’ Peter Yeo was amused by , and respectful of , a man with an obsession .
‘ Angela not workingNONMET today ?
’ Barton workedNONMET a sixteen-hour day , which beganMET with careful , detailed consideration of the trading figures and key ratios for every one of his forty-three major shops and the output of both factories , and continuedNONMET , usually by helicopter , with a detailed aerial survey of a particular area as the quick way of identifying new sites , interspersedMET with unheralded descents on the manager of any shop he tookMET a fancy to visitNONMET .
Peter Yeo , who had knownNONMET this particular juggernaut since he had his first small factory and two stores and dirt under his fingernails from shifting packing-cases personally , was not fazedNONMET by the question .
‘ Angela's takingMET a few days off — she hasn't been well , ’ he saidNONMET , easily .
‘ I knowNONMET she's been workingNONMET very hard for you .
I'm up to speedMET with Huerter , of course , but is your planning application in Leicester all right ?
’ Barton assuredNONMET him warmly that Angela had done a great job and he was now confident of gettingMET planning permission on the vast site he had wantedNONMET .
Peter Yeo , who knewNONMET him in this over- , over- mood , decided to prodMET gently .
‘ Angela saidNONMET the council wantedNONMET it for housing ?
’ ‘ Yeah , some of them did .
Silly buggers , it's jobs they wantNONMET there first .
Plenty of housing if those stupid farts at the council gotNONMET round to repairingNONMET it and stoppedMET their tenants tearingNONMET apart what they have gotNONMET .
My Mum  brought up five of us in a flat far worse than what these immigrants complainNONMET about .
’ Peter Yeo , who had personally persuadedNONMET Barton of the presentational disadvantage of usingNONMET words like ‘ darkies ’ , ‘ niggers ’ or ‘ wogs ’ , decidedNONMET that ‘ immigrants ’ even though usedNONMET in the manner of one invokingMET a curse , was as good as he was goingNONMET to getMET with this particular client .
‘ She's doing a good job on sortingMET this Huerter thing , too .
Bloody ridiculous them blokes at the DTI pushingMET assistance for Huerter .
I votedNONMET for this government because they saidNONMET they weren't goingNONMET to goNONMET in for that sort of rubbish .
No one ever gaveNONMET me anything and my business worksMET .
Still , Angie can fixMET the Treasury on this one , givenNONMET her boyfriend , can't she ?
That's the reason I wantedNONMET you on this .
’ Peter Yeo wincedMET inwardly , but he was not goingNONMET to tellNONMET Andy Barton that Angela was missing , or expressMET any of his reservations about how much influence Angela could bringMET to bearMET .
He smoothly changedMET the subject to the looks of the blond model , three tables away , and Barton agreedNONMET he wouldn't mindNONMET a bit of that ; on the thin side , mindMET you , but tasty .
The rest of lunch passed in similar diversion , interspersedMET with details of last week's turnover which were never far from Barton's mind , whatever other distractions offered .
Mrs Huntley was having lunch with her daughter .
She ateNONMET placidly , acknowledgingNONMET to herself with her customary good sense that at the moment , as at any time since her brother William had diedNONMET , she and Penelope were gettingMET no pleasure at all from each other's company .
Penelope was lookingNONMET particularly discontented and disaffected , pickingNONMET at her food .
Her red suit was smart , but too bright a colour for her pale English pink and white skin , her brown hair could have done with a wash and her nails were ragged and bittenNONMET .
She was frowningNONMET , deep lines appearingMET between her eyebrows , mouth drawnMET down at the edges so that instead of a classically good-looking slim English RoseMET in her late twenties , she lookedNONMET faded , years older than her real age , and shrewish .
Mrs Huntley sighedNONMET ; her brother whom she had lovedNONMET , but knewNONMET to be self-indulgent to a fault , had done his niece real harm by leavingMET so much of his money away from the girl who had confidently believedNONMET herself to be his favourite thing on earth .
Penelope , however , it had to be acknowledgedNONMET , had madeMET no attempt to riseMET above the blow she had been dealtMET by findingNONMET a dazzling girl of her own age favoured over herself in her uncle's will .
At least , Mrs Huntley thoughtNONMET hopefully , she had stoppedMET wonderingNONMET , unbecomingly and stridently , how her uncle could have been fooledMET by Angela Morgan .
It was Grizel Huntley's own view that her brother had not been fooledMET at all but had been charmedMET and divertedMET by a dashing girl thirty years his junior , and had seenMET no reason at all why she should not have a share of his considerable estate when that leftMET a very decent down-setting for his niece as well .
Indeed , she had respectedNONMET Angela Morgan for the straightforwardness with which she had tackledMET the issue when they had metNONMET at the lawyer's office .
‘ I'm sorry you're disappointed , ’ she had saidNONMET to Penelope , ‘ but after all there's a lot of money , quite enough for both of us .
’ So there was , Grizel Huntley acknowledgedNONMET , and it would be a great deal better if Penny could manageMET to thinkNONMET a bit more positively .
‘ If she has vanishedNONMET , I'm goingNONMET to seeMET that solicitor about whether I can getMET her presumedNONMET dead .
’ Penny , soundingNONMET childishly , sullenly determined , brokeMET into her mother's thoughts .
GrizelNONMET Huntley lookedNONMET across at her , shockedMET .
‘ I would waitNONMET a little if I were you .
’ Penelope glaredMET at her , turningNONMET an ungraceful scarlet , but Mrs Huntley heldMET her ground .
‘ You are being silly about this , Penny .
You are lettingMET this disappointment — and that's all it is , you're still a very well-off young woman — getMET in the way of everything .
’ Penelope chokedNONMET on her pudding and startedNONMET to cryNONMET , angry , uncontrollable tears .
GrizelNONMET Huntley reachedNONMET out to comfortMET her but she forcedNONMET back her chair and fledMET , clutchingNONMET her handbag and napkin , leavingNONMET her mother with the ruins of lunch .
Fifty miles north , Sarah Morgan had just finishedNONMET servingNONMET a lunch that no one had done more than pick at .
Her husband Francis had madeNONMET a slightly better showing than her daughter Jennifer , who was lookingNONMET particularly ragged .
Mother and daughter were very like each other , tall , dark , slim , pleasant-looking women with mid-brown curly hair and slightly snubNONMET noses .
Francis Morgan , by contrast , was dark , almost black-haired , sallow-skinned , with bright brown eyes .
Of medium height and packed with energy , even distressed as he was , he was burstingMET round the kitchen , hair still damp at the back from his swim .
‘ Let's goNONMET to the flicks .
No point at all sittingNONMET round lookingNONMET at each other .
ComeMET on Jennifer — or are you goingNONMET out with Michael ?
’ ‘ He's goneNONMET back to Australia , Dad .
Last week .
’ Jennifer soundedNONMET defeated , and he lookedNONMET at her sideways with familiar love and exasperation .
She just didn't seemNONMET to be able to hangNONMET on to men , he thoughtNONMET impatiently , not like his Angie , wherever she was .
‘ Giles rangNONMET up , ’ his daughter volunteered , and he was uncomfortably remindedNONMET by something in her voice that Giles Hawick was one of the men Jennifer hadn't been able to hangNONMET on to — or not once he had seenNONMET Angela .
‘ How was he ?
’ his wife Sarah askedNONMET , rather too quickly .
‘ Well , very worried .
He saidNONMET the police were talkingNONMET to everyone Angie had seenNONMET in the two weeks before she … well … vanishedNONMET , and so far had comeNONMET up with nothing .
I meanNONMET no one noticedNONMET anything unusual about her and she seemedNONMET to be full of plans for the wedding .
’ ‘ Well , I toldNONMET them that , ’ Francis Morgan saidNONMET irritably and his wife and daughter caughtMET each other's eye in silent agreement that he hadn't toldNONMET them that Angela was refusingNONMET point-black to be married from home and was insistingNONMET on the full London set-out , reception at the House of Commons , replyingNONMET unanswerably when he had objectedNONMET on grounds of expense that she could well affordNONMET to payNONMET for it herself .
A row of epic proportions had ensuedNONMET , which he and Angela had evidently enjoyedNONMET but which had leftMET Sarah and Jennifer sick with distress .
‘ I don't wantNONMET to goNONMET out , Frank .
Someone might ringMET .
’ Sarah Morgan was soundingNONMET diffident but resolute , and as Morgan openedNONMET his mouth to protestNONMET in exasperation the doorbell rangNONMET .
Both women lookedNONMET at him in joint appeal and he marchedMET to the door , pullingNONMET it open with unnecessary force .
He stoodNONMET , door in hand , checkedMET by  something in the way his visitors , a man and a woman , were standingNONMET .
The man , a stocky , greyingNONMET fifty-year-old in a navy raincoat over a suit , his hair cutNONMET short , was attendedNONMET by a uniformed policewoman , hair smartly setNONMET under the cap , her eyes watchful in the wide , flat , placid face , and both of them were standing square and stolid .
Francis Morgan stoodNONMET and staredNONMET at them , and even before the man stepped forward steadily , hand extended , mouth opening to speakNONMET , he understoodNONMET who they were and what they had comeNONMET to tellNONMET him .
Mark Sanders returnedNONMET from Istanbul feeling exhausted , depressed and ill .
The blinding headaches he had been experiencingNONMET in recent weeks were takingMET their toll , and he lookedNONMET grey and drawnNONMET when he arrivedNONMET home .
Lately , Georgina had been worried by the general deterioration in his appearance .
But now she was visibly shocked by the drained and haggard-looking face which kissedMET her .
She wantedNONMET to sayNONMET , ‘ You lookNONMET awful , darling , ’ but decided against it .
‘ What kind of a trip have you had ?
’ she askedNONMET instead .
‘ Oh , not too bad , ’ he repliedNONMET wearily .
She tookNONMET his suitcase and placed it at the bottom of the stairs .
‘ ComeNONMET into the kitchen , and we will have a cup of tea .
I ' ve so much news to tellNONMET you .
All sorts of things seemNONMET to have happenedNONMET while you have been away this time .
’ Mark smiledNONMET thinly and kissedNONMET her affectionately on the cheek .
‘ TellNONMET me about it , ’ he repliedNONMET .
‘ I could do with a good laugh .
’ ‘ Why darling ?
What's the matter ?
Trouble at t'mill ?
’ Mark slippedNONMET an arm around her slim waist as they walkedNONMET from the hall into the kitchen .
‘ Perhaps it's old Montezuma's revenge , ’ he repliedNONMET .
‘ Must be gettingMET too old for this globe-trotting lark , or else my mis -spent youth is catchingMET up on me .
I'm rapidly comingMET to the conclusion that this is a young man's game .
’ ‘ Nonsense , Mark .
You're still a young man … well , youngish. ’ she saidNONMET , tryingNONMET to teaseMET him out of his apparent lethargy and depression .
‘ Let's have that cup of tea and you'll feelMET better .
’ ‘ Ah , fillNONMET the cup , what bootsMET it to repeatNONMET , how time is slippingMET underneath our feet , ’ he quotedNONMET with a sigh .
‘ Oh darling .
What a sad sack we are today .
Is that how you feelMET ?
Shall I accompanyMET you on the violin ?
Now letNONMET me tellNONMET you all the news .
’ She pouredNONMET the tea .
‘ Christopher has been promotedNONMET after only one year .
The Chairman of the company toldNONMET him he was most impressed with the contribution he's madeMET to the business , and that he could goMET right to the top if he keepsMET it up .
I knewNONMET you'd be delighted to hearNONMET that .
’ She sippedNONMET her tea .
‘ Next … I've foundNONMET a super husband for Harriet .
Champion of the breed at Crufts last year .
Lives in the next village , believeNONMET it or not .
Absolutely magnificent dog .
’ ‘ Lucky Harriet , ’ saidNONMET Mark .
‘ What else ?
Ah yes ; a Secretary at the Ministry of Industry wantsNONMET you to ringNONMET him .
SeemsNONMET they wantNONMET you to addressMET the European Commission on European industrial development .
In Dublin , I thinkNONMET she saidNONMET .
Something about the factors which influenceNONMET multi-nat location decisions .
Anyway , you'll knowNONMET what it meansMET when you seeNONMET it .
I've writtenNONMET it all down .
Oh and yes … a chap from Conservative Central Office rangNONMET up to sayNONMET they'd likeNONMET to knowNONMET if you would be prepared to standMET for the European Parliament .
He soundedNONMET somewhat to the right of Genghis Khan .
I saidNONMET I didn't thinkNONMET so , as you were rather busy , but I'd passMET the message on .
HopeNONMET I did the right thing .
I saidNONMET you never knewNONMET where you were from one week to the next .
He saidNONMET that would do nicely .
Just like the American Express advertisement .
Perfect credentials apparently , for European parliamentarians .
‘ Now what next ?
The Chicheley-Smythes have boughtNONMET an absolutely super villa in Sardinia and sayNONMET we could rentNONMET it if we'd likeNONMET to .
I've seenNONMET the photographs .
Gorgeous location overlookingMET a quiet bay .
It sleepsNONMET ten with a permanent staff of three .
Only a thousand pounds a week , yacht included .
I'd loveNONMET that for two or three weeks , wouldn't you ?
’ ‘ We wouldn't wantNONMET to stintNONMET ourselves , ’ Mark saidNONMET facetiously , ‘ four or five , I should thinkNONMET … .
’ ‘ And we could takeNONMET the family , ’ she saidNONMET .
‘ We haven't had a family holiday for years .
I'd likeNONMET that .
But we can talkNONMET about that later .
And I've decidedNONMET to takeMET up ridingNONMET again .
Don't askNONMET me why .
Just got the urge , that's all .
’ She gaveMET him a beautiful smile , which litMET her lovely face .
‘ Well , how's that for starters ?
’ she askedNONMET .
He had heardNONMET that expression before .
‘ Is there more ?
, ‘ Now letNONMET me seeMET .
Ah , yes … Andrew's comingNONMET home for the weekend so I thoughtNONMET it would be nice to have a drinks party .
I've invitedNONMET the Bunkers , if that's all right .
I likeNONMET Clem and Gwen and the girls would be nicer company for Andrew .
’ ‘ Fine , ’ agreedNONMET Mark without much enthusiasm .
‘ If Clem can makeMET it , that is .
I heardNONMET about this latest Merseyside strike in Istanbul .
Could finishMET off the UK vehicle division , ’ he saidNONMET forlornly , ‘ and Don Peters , ’ he addedMET , shakingNONMET his head .
Some of the stupid bastards won't be satisfied until we no longer makeNONMET a single vehicle in the UK .
Then I supposeNONMET they'll sayNONMET it's all management's fault , and people will believeNONMET them .
And who the hell IS management ?
’ he demandedNONMET , his voice rising .
‘ People like me , who've workedNONMET their guts out to expandMET the business  while the militant bastards have been workingNONMET their guts out to destroyMET it .
’ Georgina was nodding agreement .
She pattedNONMET his wrist .
‘ I'm quite sure you're right , dear .
But we weren't talkingNONMET about the motor industry and the never-ending management-union saga .
We were talkingNONMET about Andrew comingNONMET home for the weekend and having the Bunkers round for drinks .
And I do wishNONMET you wouldn't swearNONMET like that when you talkNONMET about business .
You never used to swearNONMET , you knowNONMET .
At least , you didn't when you were with me .
But you do now , darling , and I do wishNONMET you wouldn't .
You are becomingNONMET so hard and bitter and it's not really likeNONMET you .
’ Mark sighedNONMET .
‘ I'm sorry .
It's just … .
’ ‘ It's just that there really is trouble at t'mill , ’ she saidNONMET quietly .
‘ That's it , isn't it ?
You weren't goingNONMET to tellNONMET me .
You were just goingNONMET to worryNONMET about it alone .
You letNONMET me goMET rabittingNONMET on … .
He huggedNONMET her ; kissedNONMET her cheek .
‘ I'm not sure yet that there really is something to worryNONMET about .
’ ‘ But you thinkNONMET there is .
’ He noddedNONMET .
‘ I have a horrible feeling that UM is about to reorganiseNONMET world-wide planning operations and , if that happensNONMET , it's curtains for the European organisation  and for me .
’ ‘ Curtains ?
’ she saidNONMET .
‘ What exactly would that meanMET ?
’ ‘ Early retirement .
’ ‘ Mark , you're not serious !
, ‘ I thinkNONMET it could be on the cards .
They could transferNONMET me to Detroit , or somewhere .
I don't knowNONMET , but I don't likeNONMET the signs .
’ ‘ Oh , Mark , ’ she saidNONMET .
‘ They wouldn't do that to you .
They just couldn't .
Not after all you've done for the Corporation .
They couldn't be that unfair and ruthless .
’ His expression was wry .
‘ My dear , they'll do whatever they feelMET is necessary to do .
Sentiment , loyalty , service and track record , none of these things will comeMET into it .
’ Georgina tookNONMET him in her arms and kissedNONMET him on the lips .
‘ It's all so ridiculous that we're not goingNONMET to even thinkNONMET about it any more , ’ she saidNONMET firmly , hidingMET her fears .
‘ Now comeNONMET into the garden , ’ she addedMET , smiling .
‘ I wantNONMET to showNONMET you the clematis .
It's a mass of colour .
’ LyingNONMET in bed that evening , they talkedNONMET a lot about their life together .
They recalledMET their first days .
The county ball .
The Paul Jones and the emotional somersaults when the music stopped and they cameMET face to face for the very first time .
The wedding .
The birth of their first son , Adam , and then Christopher and Andrew .
The children growing up with all the laughter and tears .
Schooldays and the void they both felt when the boys went off to boarding school , followedNONMET by  the joy unconfined when they cameNONMET home at the end of term .
Mark's promotions and progress up the company ladder .
New and changing homes .
Friends lost and friends gained .
Family achievements and disappointments .
Notwithstanding current problems which they discussedNONMET lightly , it had all been wonderful .
They fellMET asleep in the early hours of the morning , holdingNONMET hands .
The next day Mark arrivedNONMET back at UM's European headquarters in London and receivedNONMET an early call from Muldoon .
He wentNONMET down the airless corridor to his Boss's office , saidNONMET hello to the secretary , and walkedNONMET into the large oak-panelled room which was as big as the lobby of many a sizeable hotel .
Muldoon roseNONMET immediately from his enormous black leather chair to greetNONMET him , comingNONMET from behind the vast desk with hand outstretched .
‘ Hello Mark .
Have a good trip ?
’ He tookNONMET the Englishman by the arm and usheredNONMET him toward the easy chairs arranged around a long rectangular coffee table .
Instinctively , Mark feltMET uneasy .
Why the hand on the arm and the over- approach ?
Muldoon never emergedNONMET from behind his desk to greetNONMET colleagues .
Only visitors and VIPs gotMET that special reception .
Muldoon pouredNONMET the coffee .
‘ How did the Planning meeting goMET ?
’ Mark askedNONMET him .
‘ What was Nate's reaction ?
Did he and the Committee go  along with  my proposals ?
’ he addedMET .
‘ It wentMET fine , ’ Muldoon saidNONMET .
He seemedNONMET somewhat uneasy .
‘ Klepner did a good job .
’ ‘ How did he handleMET the questions ?
’ Mark askedNONMET .
‘ He doesn't have the inside knowledge to dealMET with questions .
’ ‘ Oh , OK really .
I handledMET some and so did Mueller .
But Klepner did OK .
He didn't letMET the side down .
’ Mark noddedNONMET .
‘ What was Mueller doing answering questions .
He was there to ASKNONMET them .
He doesn't knowNONMET the inside track any more than Klepner .
’ ‘ Maybe not , but he soon will , ’ Muldoon repliedNONMET quietly .
‘ And what does that meanMET ?
’ Muldoon seemedNONMET to be takingMET a long time over his coffee .
He evadedMET Mark's eyes .
‘ He's goin'NONMET to head-up world planning operations from Detroit .
’ ‘ He's already co-ordinatingMET the regional plans to provideNONMET a world picture .
So what's changedNONMET ?
’ Deep down he knewNONMET .
‘ He's not goingNONMET to just co-ordinateMET and consolidateNONMET any longer , ’ Muldoon saidNONMET , with increasing nervousness .
‘ He's gonNONMET na planMET , directMET and controlNONMET worldwide planning operations from Detroit , including the regional planning functions .
’ Mark's expression was one of faked incredulity .
His gut feelings had been right .
‘ You've gotNONMET to be jokingNONMET !
’ he scoffedNONMET .
‘ I knowNONMET that's what Mueller's always wantedNONMET , but Nate and the Executive Committee would never fallMET  for that bloody empire-building game !
The regions are far too big and complex to be handledMET from Detroit and even if they were foolish enough to believeNONMET that they could do it more effectively — which they can't — they would be crazy to tryNONMET .
’ ‘ I knowNONMET , Mark , I knowNONMET , ’ Muldoon saidNONMET .
‘ But that's what they're gonNONMET na do .
’ ‘ It will boomerangNONMET , ’ the Englishman saidNONMET heatedly .
‘ Overseas Governments and local nationals just won't standMET for it , particularly when they getMET to knowMET what's goingMET on .
That's one corporate plan that can't winMET , not in the long term .
‘ I knowNONMET , Mark .
But they thinkNONMET they can runMET everything from Detroit and that's the way the organisation is goingNONMET to be restructuredNONMET .
They are workingNONMET on it right now .
We will knowNONMET the details in a few weeks ’ time .
Couple of months at the latest .
’ Mark saidNONMET quietly : ‘ And how does that affectNONMET the European organisation ?
‘ The organisation  will be woundMET up .
I'm takingMET early retirement .
’ ‘ And me ?
’ Muldoon shruggedNONMET .
‘ Not certain yet .
But my guess is early retirement too , unless you're prepared to go    back to divisional work .
Local MD perhaps ?
’ The Englishman snortedNONMET .
‘ You knowNONMET I can't go back .
Who the hell can ?
In any case , you knowNONMET as well as I do that the MDs are always American .
’ ‘ Well , there won't be any European job functions , that's for sure , ’ Muldoon saidNONMET .
‘ There'll be a direct link between Detroit and the line managers in each country , with Detroit callingMET the shots .
’ ‘ Don't they realiseNONMET they're playingMET with political dynamite ?
Mark demandedNONMET .
‘ Mueller won't giveMET a damn about the effect of a corporate plan on Europe and on individual countries .
If he wantsNONMET to importNONMET vehicles or components from Taiwan or Singapore or Hong Kong into Europe , he'll goMET ahead and do it , regardless of the economic consequences for the European countries concerned .
The only thing you can be sure of is that US interest will always comeMET first .
Oh , and there's one more thing you can be sure of , ’ he addedMET sourly .
‘ They won't planMET to supplyNONMET the US market from imports .
You can betNONMET your bottom dollar on that !
Jesus weptNONMET !
’ he continuedNONMET , hackles risingMET .
‘ Mueller will have the power to makeMET or breakMET whole areas of Europe .
He's the last guy in the world who should be givenMET such power .
The bloody man's power drunk already .
’ He was angry and bitter .
‘ I knowNONMET , ’ Muldoon agreedNONMET sadly .
‘ Then what are you and Clancy doing about it ?
’ ‘ LookMET , Mark , ’ Muldoon saidNONMET forlornly ‘ What's the point ?
The wheels have already been setMET in motion .
We're not gonNONMET na changeMET anyone's mind .
You knowNONMET that .
’ His tone was abject .
‘ Sorry you're takinMET it so bad , ’ he addedMET miserably .
‘ How else should I takeMET it ?
’ Mark demandedNONMET .
‘ It's my life which is about to goMET down the plughole .
I'm not an American on a brief overseas assignment .
I've spentMET my entire working life in the European components ’ business .
I've grownMET up in it .
It's in my blood .
I've builtNONMET plants and managedNONMET them .
Designed products and marketed and soldNONMET them .
When I was an apprentice there were two component plants in Europe , and now there are seventeen , and I've had a hand in establishingNONMET the last twelve .
What the hell do you expectNONMET me to sayNONMET ?
Oh , is that what they are proposingNONMET to do ?
Well bullyMET for Mueller and the Corporation ?
I'll goMET and collectMET my hat and coat !
’ ‘ I knowNONMET how you feelMET , Mark , ’ Muldoon saidNONMET sadly .
‘ Do you , Pat ?
Do you ?
You're sixty-one and have been lookingMET forward to retirement .
I'm fifty and have a long way to goNONMET .
I don't thinkNONMET you can seeMET things the way I seeMET them .
‘ Well , perhaps not , ’ Muldoon agreedNONMET .
‘ But I can understandNONMET how you feelMET .
’ The Englishman noddedNONMET and pouredNONMET himself more coffee .
‘ So what's goingNONMET to happenNONMET to the European Plan ?
’ he askedNONMET .
‘ Mueller will driveMET it from Detroit , with one or two amendments agreed at the EPC meeting , ’ Muldoon toldNONMET him .
‘ What amendments ?
’ ‘ No further plant investment in the UK .
’ ‘ I supposeNONMET Mueller sawMET to that , ’ Mark saidNONMET sarcastically .
‘ He really hatesNONMET our guts !
God helpNONMET the British plants under the new regime !
’ Muldoon shookNONMET his head .
‘ No , it wasn't that .
It was the strike at Merseyside .
That was the last straw as far as Nate was concerned .
Up until that news hitMET the Committee , Don had wonNONMET the day with his UK Vehicle Division proposals .
But as soon as Nate heard about the latest strike , that was it .
End of story .
He instructedNONMET Mueller to phase-out vehicle manufacture in the UK .
’ Mark noddedNONMET .
‘ How did Don takeMET it ?
He was beginningNONMET to win through .
’ ‘ He's very upset .
Naturally .
It's the first time in his career he hasn't comeMET out on top .
Mueller is taking over the plan , and Don is being transferredNONMET back to the States .
Public relations job or something similar .
Just thinkNONMET of it , a man of his talent and ability stoogingMET around the media .
’ ‘ So when's he goingNONMET back to the States ?
’ Mark saidNONMET .
‘ It won't be announcedNONMET for a week or so , but he's already been toldNONMET .
He'll flyNONMET out inside the month .
’ ‘ And what do you and I do now ?
Mark enquiredNONMET .
‘ Start emptyingNONMET the files ?
’ Muldoon madeMET a face .
‘ Afraid so .
Klepner will take over the files and shipNONMET them back to the States .
He'll be Mueller's European components ’ PlanningMET Manager in Detroit .
’ ‘ Klepner ?
’ Mark utteredNONMET in mock astonishment .
‘ The man knowsNONMET nothing about Europe .
He's a novice .
A bloody charlatan !
’ ‘ I knowNONMET it soundsNONMET crazy , Mark , ’ Muldoon saidNONMET .
‘ But there it is .
We have no choice in the matter .
I was instructedNONMET to tellNONMET you , and I have .
New York and Detroit will comeMET up with an attractive separation package , you can be sure of that .
They've already toldNONMET me you'll getMET the maximum terms permitted under British law .
The Corporation wantsMET to do the right thing by you .
’ The two men roseNONMET from the table together .
‘ Sure .
We have no choice in the matter , ’ saidNONMET the Englishman .
‘ There has to be losers as well as winners , , saidNONMET the American .
‘ I guessNONMET we're both losers , Mark .
’ The Englishman returned to his own palatial office and satNONMET with his head in hands .
Another of his blinding headaches had developedNONMET and he feltNONMET a tight sensation in his chest , which madeMET breathingNONMET very painful and difficult .
His secretary enteredNONMET the room .
Can I getNONMET you a coffee , Mr Sanders ?
You don't lookNONMET at all well .
Shall I getMET the doctor ?
’ He lookedNONMET up and smiledNONMET .
‘ No thankNONMET you Millie .
I'm all right .
Just a headache .
Be OK in a minute .
Would loveNONMET a cup of coffee though .
‘ Are you sure I shouldn't getMET a doctor ?
’ she askedNONMET .
‘ No thankNONMET you .
I'll be OK .
It's only a headache .
’ Millie had her reasons for being concerned .
The petticoat Mafia at the top of the organisation always knewMET what was goingMET on , often before the top executives themselves .
Millie and the secretaries of Pat Muldoon and Clancy McGillicuddy were all close friends .
They had gotMET together over the weekend to discussNONMET the implications of the confidential letter the two Americans had receivedNONMET from Randy Mueller on behalf of Nate Cocello .
Major changes were afoot which affectedNONMET their respective bosses .
By the time Mark reachedMET home that evening , the pains in his head were excruciating .
He decidedNONMET against tellingNONMET Georgina about his meeting with Muldoon .
He would waitNONMET for the right moment .
This wasn't it .
HOMICIDE This chapter deals with the approach of the criminal law to behaviour which causesNONMET or risks causingNONMET death .
Murder , manslaughter , and several other offences are discussedMET , and one recurrent issue here is whether English law respondsMET proportionately to the different degrees of culpability manifested in cases where death is causedNONMET .
7.1 DEATH AND FINALITY For practical purposes , the culpable causingNONMET of another person's death may fairly be regardedMET as the most serious offence in the criminal calendar .
There is an argument that treason is a more serious offence , since it strikesMET at the very foundations of the State and its social organizations , but treason is so rare that it is surely permissible to treatNONMET homicide as the most serious form of crime .
The reason for this is not difficult to findMET : the harm causedNONMET by many other crimes is remediable to a degree , whereas the harm causedNONMET by homicide is absolutely irremediable .
Even in crimes of violence which leaveMET some permanent physical disfigurement or psychological effects , the victim retainsMET his or her life and , therefore , the possibility of further pleasures and achievements , whereas death is final .
This finality makesMET it proper to regardMET death as the most serious harm that may be inflictedNONMET on another , and to regardMET a person who choosesNONMET to inflictNONMET that harm as the most culpable of offenders , in the absence of some excuse or justification .
Although many deaths ariseMET from natural causes , and many others from illnesses and diseases , each year seesMET a large number of deaths causedNONMET by ‘ accidents ’ , and also a number causedNONMET by acts or omissions which amountMET to some form of homicide in English law .
For 1987 the statistics showMET that there were some 20,000 accidental deaths , of which some 7,000 occurredNONMET in the home , 6,000 at work , and 5,000 on the roads .
By comparison , the number of deaths recorded as criminal homicide was 600 , which includesMET all the murders and manslaughters .
This figure is relatively small when comparedNONMET with many American cities , but that is no cause for satisfaction .
There are still awkward questions to be confrontedMET .
For example , are we satisfiedNONMET that the 600 deaths recorded as homicide are in fact more culpable than all , or even most , of the deaths recorded as accidents ?
In other words , does English criminal law pickMET out the most heinous forms of killingNONMET as murders and manslaughters , or are the boundaries frozenMET by tradition ?
Another question is whether the criminal law ought not to be wider in its application to activities which carryMET some risk of causingNONMET death than in other spheres .
Thus , even if it would be excessive to sweepMET large numbers of the deaths now recorded as ‘ accidents ’ into the law of homicide , there may be sufficient justification for creatingMET or enforcing offences designedMET to ensureNONMET safe conditions of work , safe goods , safe buildings , and so on .
It was arguedNONMET in Chapter 2 that the criminal law ought to spreadMET its net wider where the potential harm is greater .
It will be seenMET that English law does this up to a point , and in the process seemsNONMET to acceptMET social -defence arguments as reasons for departingMET from several of the principles setMET out in Chapter 3 .
7.2 REQUIREMENTS OF CRIMINAL HOMICIDE English law distinguishesMET between the offences of murder and manslaughter , as we shall seeNONMET , but the two crimes do have certain common elements .
It must be provedNONMET that the defendant's act or omission causedNONMET the death of the victim within a year and a day .
( The requirements of causation in the criminal law are discussedMET elsewhere .
) The ‘ year and a day ’ rule is a legacy of times when medical science was so rudimentary that , if there was a substantial lapse of time between injury and death , it was unsafe to pronounceMET on whether the defendant's conduct or some other event causedNONMET the death .
Nowadays the problem is quite the reverse : medical science is generally able to determineMET whether D's conductNONMET causedNONMET the death , and innovations such as life -support machines meanNONMET that life can be prolongedNONMET for months and years in some instances .
In one recent case the victim of a stabbing diedNONMET two and a half years after the incident , having been keptMET on a life- support machine for almost the entire time .
In principle , it seemsNONMET unjust that a homicide conviction should not be possible in such a case , if all the other elements can be establishedNONMET and only the ‘ year and a day ’ rule stands in the way .
But the rule was confirmedNONMET by the Criminal Law Revision Committee in 1980 , on the ground that a defendant should not be leftMET in peril of a homicide conviction indefinitely .
Surely prosecutorial discretion should be enough to preventNONMET unfair convictions years after the event .
The rule itself is out accord with modern medical conditions and should be abolishedNONMET .
DEFINING MURDER : THE INCLUSIONARY QUESTION ( a ) The Procedural Context If causingNONMET death is to be regardedMET as the most serious harm that can be inflictedNONMET , it would seemNONMET to followMET that the most blameworthy form of homicide should resultNONMET in the highest sentences imposedMET by the courts .
Indeed , many systems of criminal law imposeMET a mandatory sentence for murder ( or whatever the highest form of homicide is calledMET in that system ) .
In some jurisdictions this is a mandatory sentence of death .
In others , such as those in the United Kingdom , it is the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment .
Why should this penalty be mandatory , and not at the discretion of the court as in other offences ?
One argument in favour of the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment is that it amountsMET to a symbolic indication of the unique heinousness of murder .
It placesMET the offender under the State's control , as it were , for the remainder of his or her life .
This is often linkedMET with a supposed denunciatory effect — the idea that the mandatory life sentence denouncesMET murder as emphatically as possible — and with a supposed general deterrent effect , in declaringMET that there is no mitigation of sentence available for this crime .
It might also be arguedNONMET that the mandatory life sentence makesMET a substantial contribution to public safety .
None of these arguments is notably strong , let alone conclusive .
The mandatory penalty does indeed serveMET to markMET out murder from other crimes , but whether the definition of murder is sufficiently refined to captureMET the worst killings , and only the worst killings , remainsMET to be discussedMET below .
Whether the life sentence is regardedMET as a sufficient denunciation in society dependsNONMET on the public's perception of what life imprisonment meansNONMET : if it is widely believed that it resultsNONMET in an average of nine years ' imprisonment , the effect will be somewhat blunted .
The same appliesNONMET to the general deterrent argument : its effectiveness dependsNONMET on whether the penalty for murder affectsNONMET the calculations of potential killers at all , and , if it does , whether life imprisonment is seenMET as significantly more or less severe than the alternative of a long , fixed- sentence .
As for public protection , this dependsNONMET on executive decisions with regard to release ; it failsMET to takeMET into account whether it is necessary for public protection to keepNONMET ‘ lifers ’ in for so long .
This bringsMET the discussion to a crucial point : what does the sentence of life imprisonment mean in practice , and what would be the alternative ?
What it meansNONMET is that the time of release from prison is determinedNONMET by the Home Secretary , on the advice of the Parole Board and the Lord Chief Justice , rather than by the judge at the trial .
In procedural terms , therefore , the life sentence involvesNONMET a transfer of function : normally it is the judge who determinesNONMET the sentence ( or at least its upper limit , since earlier release on parole may be possible ) , whereas a life sentence entrustsMET that function to the executive , who must first ascertainNONMET the opinions of the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge .
The Home Office is not boundMET by those opinions , and appearsNONMET to departMET from them frequently .
In 1983 the Home Secretary imposed restrictions on the release of persons servingMET life for murders of police- and prison-officers , terrorist killings , murder during robbery , and the sadistic or sexual murder of young children , fixingMET a minimum of twenty years ' imprisonment for these offenders .
Whatever the justifications for introducingMET this policy , it servesMET to underlineMET the fact that sentencing in murder cases is enactedMET without each case being consideredMET individually , after hearingNONMET representations from the offender's counsel , and without a sentence announced in court and subject to appeal .
At present , the executive takesMET decisions to releaseNONMET some murderers after only a few years and to keepNONMET others in prison for extremely long periods .
Should those decisions not be takenMET by the courts , in the same way as other sentencing decisions ?
The answer sometimes givenMET is that murderers should be treatedNONMET differently because they are particularly dangerous : anyone who choosesNONMET to killNONMET once can chooseNONMET to killNONMET again .
But this argument will seemNONMET less persuasive when we have discussedMET cases of manslaughter by reason of diminished responsibility : where a murder is reducedMET to manslaughter , the judge has a wide sentencing discretion and may , according to the facts of the case , selectNONMET a determinate prison sentence , a hospital order , or life imprisonment .
Those who killNONMET and are convicted of manslaughter by reason of diminished responsibility are no less dangerous than those convicted of murder , and yet the judge has sentencing discretion in one case and not in the other .
Considerations of this kind have ledMET the House of Lords Select Committee on Murder and Life Imprisonment to recommendNONMET the abolition of the mandatory sentence for murder .
In its place would be a sentencing discretion , which judges would useNONMET , in many cases , to markMET the relative heinousness of the murder by a determinate prison sentence .
In cases where life imprisonment was thoughtNONMET to be the appropriate sentence , the trial judge would still specifyNONMET — in open court — the number of years to be spentMET in prison , takingMET the gravity of the offence into account , and release would be determinedMET by a judicial tribunal .
Such a reform would bringMET improvements in natural justice without loss of public protection .
( b ) Degrees of Homicide English criminal law has two degrees of homicide , murder and manslaughter .
Many American jurisdictions have three degrees of murder — first- degree murder , requiringNONMET premeditation , and second- and third- degree murder , coveringMET lesser shades of culpability .
In England there has been a proposal that we should do away with all these distinctions , leavingMET a single offence of criminal homicide .
That proposal , if implementedNONMET , would shiftMET almost all the decision-making in homicide cases from the trial to the sentencing stage : the only issue of any consequence in most cases would be the sentence to be imposedNONMET , and all the distinctions now drawnMET at the stage of criminal liability would be reflectedMET in the sentence alone .
The jury would have no role in most homicide cases , since a plea of guilty would be the norm .
Contrast this with the position in jurisdictions where there are three or more degrees of homicide : pleas of guilty to first- and second -degree murders would be less frequent , since there would be the possibility of argument in court ( if no bargain was struckMET beforehand between prosecution and defence ) , and the defence might succeedMET in persuadingNONMET the jury to reduceMET the degree of the killing .
Moreover , the borderlines between the various degrees would raiseMET questions of law , which would provideNONMET much opportunity for legal argument and for appeals .
The result would be that killings were classified and labelledMET in a more refined way , but at the cost of lengthy trials and mounting legal-aid bills .
That cost is not difficult to justifyNONMET where capital punishment is the penalty for first- degree murder .
Where there is no capital punishment , however , the question of how many degrees of homicide it is desirable to have calls for careful weighing of the principle of fair labelling ( seeNONMET Chapter 3.3 ( l ) ) against the cost and time arguments mobilisedMET by the policy of efficient administration ( seeNONMET Chapter 3.3 ( m ) ) .
The structure of the English law of homicide is rather strange .
Although there are two offences , murder and manslaughter , the latter includesMET two distinct varieties : ‘ voluntary ’ manslaughter ( killings which would be murder but for the existence of defined extenuating circumstances ) ; and ‘ involuntary ’ manslaughter ( killings for which there is no need to proveNONMET any awareness of the risk of death being causedNONMET , but for which there is thoughtNONMET to be sufficient fault to justifyNONMET criminal liability ) .
The arguments therefore tendMET to focusMET on three borderline questions : What is the minimum fault requiredNONMET for conviction of murder ?
What conditions are neededNONMET to reduceMET murder to manslaughter ?
And what is the minimum fault requiredNONMET for a conviction of manslaughter .
( c ) Requirements for Murder In English criminal law there are now two alternative fault requirements for murder : an intent to killNONMET , or an intent to causeNONMET grievous bodily harm .
What do these requirements meanNONMET ?
Do they extendMET the definition of murder too far , or are they too narrowMET .
Intent to killNONMET may be regardedMET as the most obvious and indisputable form of fault element for murder , but to some extent that dependsNONMET on the meaning of ‘ intent ’ .
This has been the subject of a number of House of Lords decisions , and yet the definition is still not clear and settledMET .
Probably the most accurate statement would be that a person intendsNONMET to killNONMET if it is his or her purpose to killNONMET by the act or omission charged , or if he or she foreseesNONMET that death is practically certain to followMET from that act or omission .
In this way , both purpose and foresight of practical certainty are regardedMET as part of the definition of intent , although there are other statements suggestingMET that foresight of practical or ‘ virtual ’ certainty is merely evidence from which intent may be inferredNONMET .
How would this testNONMET be appliedMET ?
In many cases the word ‘ intent ’ is usedNONMET without elaboration , but there are some for which a full explanation of the meaning of intention is necessary .
A fairly typical set of facts is providedNONMET by Nedrick ( 1986 ) , where D had a grudge against a woman and had threatenedNONMET to ‘ burn her out ’ .
One night he wentNONMET to her house , poured paraffin through the letter-box and on to the front door , and setMET it alight .
One of the woman's children diedNONMET in the ensuing fire .
When asked why he did it , D repliedNONMET : ‘ Just to wake her up and frightenNONMET her .
’ A defence of this kind , a claim that the purpose was only to frightenNONMET and not to causeNONMET harm , requiresNONMET the full definition to be putMET to the jury .
The question is : granted that D's purpose was to frightenNONMET , did he nonetheless realizeNONMET that it was practically certain that his act would causeNONMET death or grievous bodily harm to someone ?
The jury should answerNONMET this by drawing inferences from the evidence in the case and from the surrounding circumstances .
What about the alternative element in the definition , an intent to causeNONMET grievous bodily harm ?
This has considerable practical importance , since this is all that the prosecution has to proveNONMET in order to obtainNONMET a verdict of guilty of murder .
It must be shownMET that the defendant intendedNONMET ( which , again , includesMET both purpose and awareness of practical certainty ) to causeNONMET really serious injury to someone .
The House of Lords confirmed this rule in Cunningham ( 1981 ) : D struckNONMET his victim on the head a number of times with a chair , causingNONMET injuries from which the victim diedNONMET a week later .
D maintainedMET throughout that he had not intendedNONMET to killNONMET , but there was evidence from which the jury could inferNONMET — and did inferNONMET — that he intendedNONMET to causeNONMET grievous bodily harm .
The House of Lords upheld D's conviction for murder : an intent to causeNONMET really serious injury is sufficient for murder , without any proof that the defendant intended , or even contemplatedMET , the possibility that death would resultNONMET .
Does the ‘ grievous bodily harm ’ rule extendMET the definition of murder too far ?
If the point of distinguishing murder from manslaughter is to markMET out the most heinous group of killings for the extra stigma of a murder conviction , it can be arguedNONMET that the ‘ grievous bodily harm ’ rule drawsMET the line too low .
In terms of principle , the rule requiresNONMET justification because it departsMET from the principle of correspondence ( seeNONMET Chapter 5.2(a) ) , namely that the fault element in a crime should relateNONMET to the consequences prohibitedNONMET by that crime .
By allowingMET an intent to causeNONMET grievous bodily harm to sufficeNONMET for a murder conviction , the law is violatingMET a general principle , turningMET the most serious of its offences into a constructive crime .
Why should it be necessary to ‘ constructMET ’ a murder conviction out of this lesser intent ?
There are arguments in favour of this : death is final , murder is the gravest crime , and there is no significant moral difference between someone who choosesNONMET to causeNONMET really serious injury and someone who setsMET out to killNONMET .
No one can predictNONMET whether a serious injury will resultNONMET in death — that may dependNONMET on the victim's physique , on the speed of an ambulance , on the distance from the hospital , and on a range of other medical and individual matters .
If one person choosesNONMET to causeNONMET serious injury to another , it should be presumedNONMET that he or she realizesNONMET that there is always a risk of death , and such cases showMET a sufficiently wanton disregard for life as to warrant the label ‘ murder ’ if death results .
The counter-arguments , which would upholdMET the principle of correspondence , are that breach of that principle is unnecessary when the amplitude of the crime of manslaughter lies beneath murder , and also that the definition of grievous bodily harm includesMET a number of injuries which are most unlikely to putMET the victim's life at risk .
In the leading case of Cunningham Lord Edmund-Davies ( dissentingNONMET ) gaveMET the example of breakingNONMET someone's arm : that is a really serious injury , but one which is unlikely to endangerNONMET the victim's life .
So in practice the ‘ grievous bodily harm ’ rule goesMET further than the arguments of its protagonists would supportMET .
Would it be right , then , to confineMET the fault element in murder to an intent to killNONMET ?
That would have the merit of simplicity , but would it strikeMET the right note socially ?
There are powerful arguments in favour of sayingNONMET that there are other killings where an intent to killNONMET can not be establishedNONMET , and yet where the moral or social culpability is equal to that in most intentional killings .
Of course , one can not be adamant about whether they meritNONMET the label ‘ murder ’ , because that is a question of drawingMET the line between murder and manslaughter , which is not susceptible of any precise resolution .
It is hard to argueNONMET conclusively that the category of murder should be smaller or larger ( unless the death penalty or a mandatory life sentence followsMET ) ; it is a question of social judgment .
LetNONMET us briefly considerMET some of the possibilities .
The fault element for many serious offences is intent or recklessness : why should this not sufficeNONMET for murder ?
The question is whether all killings in which the defendant is aware of the risk of death are sufficiently serious to warrantNONMET the term ‘ murder ’ .
One answer sometimes givenMET is that they are not , because a driver who overtakesNONMET on a bend , knowingly takingMET the risk that there is a car travelling in the opposite direction , should not be labelledMET a murderer if a collision and death happenNONMET to ensueNONMET .
This example assumesMET that a sympathy for motorists with overwhelm any tendency to logical analysis .
One might askNONMET whether motorists are ever justifiedNONMET in knowingly takingMET risks with other people's lives .
Yet if the example is modifiedMET a little , so that the overtaking is on a country road at night and the risk is knownNONMET to be slight , it becomesNONMET questionable whether the causing of death in these circumstances should be labelledMET in the same way as intentional killings .
This is not to suggestNONMET that motorists should be treatedNONMET differently .
The point is rather that , even though knowingly takingMET risks with other people's lives is usually unjustifiable , takingMET a slight risk is less serious than intentionally causingNONMET death .
In discussingMET the boundaries of murder , we are concerned with classification , not exculpation .
To classifyNONMET all reckless killings as murder might be too broad , but the point remainsMET that some reckless killings may be thoughtNONMET no less heinous than intentional killings .
Can a satisfactory line be drawnMET here ?
One approach would be to drawMET the line by reference to the degree of probability .
Murder is committedNONMET in those situations where D caused death by an act or omission which he knewNONMET had death as the probable or highly probable result .
A version of this test of foresight of high probability is usedNONMET in several other European countries ; it was introducedMET into English law by the decision in Hyam v. DPP ( 1975 ) , but abandoned in Moloney ( 1985 ) on grounds of uncertainty .
A second approach is to frameMET the law in such a way as to makeMET it clear that the court should makeMET a moral judgment on the gravity of the defendant's conduct .
Section 210.2 of the Model Penal Code includesMET within murder those reckless killings which manifestNONMET ‘ extreme indifference to the value of human life ’ .
Scots law treats as murder killings with ‘ wicked recklessness ’ , a phrase which directsMET the court's attention to the circumstances of the killing .
Both the Model Penal Code test and the Scots test may be reducedMET to circularity , however , for when one asksNONMET how extreme or how wicked the recklessness should be , the only possible answer is : ‘ wicked or extreme enough to justifyNONMET the stigma of a murder conviction ’ .
Admittedly , the Model Penal Code does containMET a list of circumstances which may amountMET to extreme indifference , which assistsMET the courts and increasesMET the predictability of verdicts in a way that Scots law does not , but the essence of both approaches is that there is no precise way of describingNONMET those non-intentional killings which are as heinous as intentional killings .
Their protagonists argueNONMET that the law of murder is so important socially that derogation from the principle of maximum certainty should be allowedNONMET in favour of more accurate labelling by the courts ; opponents argueNONMET that the principle of maximum certainty is neededNONMET here specifically to reduceMET the risk of verdicts basedNONMET on discriminatory or irrelevant factors , such as distaste for the defendant's background , allegiance , or other activities .
A third , more precise formulation derivesMET from the recommendations of the Criminal Law Revision Committee in 1980 , namely , that a killing should be classifiedNONMET as murder in those situations where there is an intention to causeNONMET serious injury coupled with awareness of the risk of death .
Neither an intention to causeNONMET serious injury nor recklessness as to death should be sufficient on its own , but together they restrictMET one another , producingMET a test which both satisfiesMET the criterion of certainty and marks out some heinous but non-intended killings .
A fourth approach , adoptedMET by English law until 1957 and still in force in many American jurisdictions , is some form of felony-murder rule : anyone who killsNONMET during the course of a felony ( or , more restrictively , a serious crime of violence ) or whilst resisting arrest should be convictedNONMET of murder .
Thus statedNONMET , there is no reference to the defendant's intention or awareness of the risks : the fact that D has chosenNONMET to commitNONMET rape , robbery , or another serious offence , and has causedNONMET death thereby , is heldMET to constituteNONMET sufficient moral grounds for placingMET the killing in the highest category .
Plainly , this is a form of constructive criminal liability : the murder conviction is constructedMET out of the ingredients of a lesser offence .
Presumably the justification is that D has already crossedMET a high moral/social threshold in choosingNONMET to commitNONMET such a serious offence , and should therefore be heldMET liable for whatever consequences ensueNONMET , however unforeseeable they may be .
The objections would be reducedMET if awareness of the risk of death was also requiredNONMET : in other words , if the test were the commission of a serious offence of violence plus recklessness as to death .
The effect of that test would be to pickNONMET out those reckless killings which occurredNONMET when D had already manifestedNONMET substantial moral and legal culpability , and to classifyNONMET them as murder .
Four alternative approaches have been describedNONMET , and many others could be listedNONMET .
The point is that the traditional concepts of intention and recklessness do not , of themselves , appearNONMET to be sufficiently well focusedMET to markMET out those killings which are the most heinous .
The law must resortMET to some kind of moral and social evaluation of conduct if it is to identifyMET and separateMET out the most heinous killings .
Many people might thinkNONMET that a person who causesNONMET death whilst usingNONMET an unlawfully held firearm or explosives ought to be convictedNONMET of murder because there is , generally speaking , no excuse for usingNONMET such dangerous equipment .
Some of the people thus coveredMET would be armed robbers , others would be terrorists .
The armed robber might sayNONMET that he had no intention of usingNONMET the firearm , that he carriedNONMET it with him simply to frightenNONMET the victim , and that it went off accidentally : if the jury believesNONMET that , should he be convictedNONMET of murder ?
Property : Don't letMET yourself in for trouble ChoosingNONMET the right agent is essential if you wantNONMET to rentNONMET your property .
Francesca Simon  describesNONMET some of the pitfalls — and how to avoidMET them By FRANCESCA SIMON DEBBIE ADAMS had to letNONMET her East End terrace house in London in a hurry when her husband was re-located to Ireland with two months ' notice .
She wentNONMET to a local letting agency , Landlords of 41 Roman Road , Bethnal Green , London E2 , who foundMET a tenant that day .
She also employedMET Landlords to manageNONMET the let .
As is common practice , Landlords keptMET the tenant's deposit of £650 and toldMET Debbie they would takeMET their entire fee of £881 up front , so she expectedNONMET no rent for the first month .
But July also passedMET without Debbie receivingNONMET any money .
‘ I phonedNONMET and saidNONMET , ‘ Where's the money ?
’ and was toldNONMET there were problems with the book-keeper , who would be comingMET in to sortMET it out , ’ saysNONMET Debbie .
‘ But nothing happenedNONMET and I never heardMET from them .
’ She repeatedly phonedMET Landlords , but was either unable to getMET an answer or toldMET that manager Howard Keizner was unavailable .
Finally , after the third month passedMET with no rent received , Debbie phonedNONMET the tenants , askedNONMET them to payNONMET her directly , and sentMET Landlords a recorded-delivery letter , which was returnedNONMET , and finally one by ordinary post statingMET that Landlords were no longer employedMET as the managing agents .
Because they hadn't done any management , Debbie feltMET Landlords were entitledMET only to the 10 per cent tenant- finding fee and therefore owed her £2,400 ( 3 months ' rent plus the deposit ) .
In December 1991 she suedNONMET .
Landlords didn't acknowledgeMET the writ , so in January Debbie's solicitor requestedNONMET a judgment in default for the full amount plus interest and court fees , a total of £2,453.24 .
Just before the court was due to hearMET the request her solicitor receivedNONMET a cheque for £2,400 .
‘ They hadn't paidNONMET the interest and court fees , but we got back every single penny they owedNONMET .
We were lucky , ’ saysNONMET Debbie Adams .
Howard Keizner , of Landlords , saidNONMET : ‘ There were a lot of complications with this particular letting and management .
’ But he declinedNONMET further comment .
Last week he promisedNONMET to supplyNONMET us with a written explanation of the way his company had treatedMET Debbie , but it never arrivedMET .
Yusuf and Shabira Gulamali were less fortunate .
They lostMET over £4,000 dealing with two letting agencies which closed down without payingMET them the rent and tenants ' deposit owed on their Wembley flat .
They hiredNONMET the first agent , ‘ DigsNONMET ’ , of Oxford Street , to manageNONMET as well as to letNONMET their flat .
The Gulamalis receivedNONMET their rent for the first three months , then nothing for four months , and were toldMET the computer was broken , the accounts were being movedMET , the cheque was in the post , and so on .
‘ After four months they closed down owingNONMET us £3,500 , ’ saysNONMET Shabira .
‘ Together with some other clients we tookMET the owner to court but he escapedNONMET to Spain .
’ The second time round they dealtMET with R. and B. Lettings in London NW10 , who they instructedNONMET just to findMET a tenant .
The Gulamalis never received the agreement form , the tenants ' deposit or the first month's rent .
‘ Finally , we wentNONMET to the office and they gaveMET us a cheque , which bouncedMET .
’ The offices of R and B. Lettings are now up for sale .
‘ Anyone can setMET up a letting agency , ’ saysNONMET David Galsworthy , Vice President of the National Association of Estate Agents .
‘ They comeMET and goMET , so it paysMET to dealMET with a member of a professional body , such as the NAEA , the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors or the Incorporated Society of Valuers and Auctioneers .
In case of a dispute you can complainNONMET to the professional body , and members are bonded , which meansMET that deposits and rent are coveredMET in case of fraud or dishonesty .
’ If you are thinkingNONMET of lettingNONMET your property , the following points will helpNONMET to safeguardNONMET your interests : AskMET any agency you are considering usingNONMET if they are a member of one of the above professional associations .
If in doubt , askMET to seeNONMET proof of their membership .
If , in addition to findingMET a tenant , the agency is managingMET the let , you should be paidNONMET every month , less a tenant- finding fee of between two and four weeks ' rent .
The agency will keepMET the tenant's deposit until the tenant leaves .
If the letting agent is not managingNONMET the flat , the tenant's deposit should be givenMET to the owner immediately .
ExpectNONMET to payNONMET a management fee of up to 15 per cent .
Some agencies deductMET it every month , others wantMET it all up front , so shop around .
If the owner is abroad , the agent will also collectMET tax at the standard rate of 25 per cent , which will be deductedNONMET from your monthly rent cheque .
LettingNONMET agencies should never chargeMET tenants a finder's fee , although according to Galsworthy , many agencies do .
‘ It's not ethical as they are actingMET for the landlord , ’ he saysNONMET .
The self-regulating NAEA has 10,000 members , of which 2,000 also do letting and management .
But Galsworthy believesNONMET there is a clear need for the licensing of all letting agents .
‘ We wantNONMET everyone to be licensedNONMET , but the Government didn't thinkMET it necessary .
Section 22 of the 1979 Estate Agents Act dealingMET with bonding , licensing and standards of >competency has not been broughtMET in .
But we must have a common code and we must have licensing , ’ he saidNONMET .
Until then , owners and tenants bewareNONMET .
Travel : Copse and robbers Christopher Somerville seesMET how woodland has usurpedMET the ancient cattle thieves of the Cheviot Hills By CHRISTOPHER SOMERVILLE WHEN a Charlton chief sat down to dinner in times goneMET by and foundNONMET a spur on the table where his meal should have been , he knewNONMET the cupboard was bare once more .
His wife was tellingMET him to saddle up and stealNONMET a fresh batch of cattle from his neighbour's herds .
The families of North Tynedale in westernmost Northumberland — Charltons and Robsons , Milburns and Dodds — were never slow to layMET hands on each other's property in the lawless old days .
Here , where the Scottish border ranMET across the Cheviot Hills , far from civilisation , ‘ reivingNONMET ’ , or cattle-thieving , was a way of life .
Remoteness is still the keynote of this region , but a Charlton reiving party would be hard putMET to it these days to work up a good gallop along the upper reaches of the North Tyne River .
Since 1926 the western fringes of the Cheviots have been plantedNONMET with 250 square miles of close- packed conifers , while in their depths sprawlMET the seven miles of the Kielder Water reservoir , Europe's largest man-made lake .
I foundMET it hard to pictureMET what kind of landscape those statistics might have shapedMET , until I openedNONMET the Ordnance Survey map to findNONMET half of it coloured green with a great blue stain in the centre .
Kielder Water is beautiful , and the Kielder trees formidably impressive in their domination of the hills .
But by the time I had turnedNONMET off the road from Bellingham at Kielder village and drivenNONMET up the bumpy Forest Drive to East Kielder Farm , I was longingNONMET for the sight of something other than water and trees .
Relief was at hand .
The farm stands on a spur of moorland on the northern edge of the forest , and within 10 minutes I had turnedNONMET my back on the corduroy battalions of trees and was stridingNONMET under a still , cloudy sky over tussocks of rush and coarse grass , with my face to the long , bare shoulders of open hillside that flank the winding shallows of the East Kielder Burn .
The footpath that runsMET with the burn is not one of those carefully waymarked and leafletedNONMET by the Forestry Commission .
There are few attractions for the Kielder tourist here .
The burn threadsMET a wild and inhospitable crevice of the hills , where the wind blowsMET cold and the sense of isolation growsMET with each lonely mile .
WalkingNONMET here , you leaveMET the 20th century behind on the outskirts of the forest and enterMET the reconstructed emptiness in which the reivers and cross-border raiders of the past could operateMET unhindered .
I squelchedNONMET across tiny burns runningMET in black channels of peat , and stoodNONMET lookingNONMET down from the hillside on to the grey roofs of Scaup Farm .
The hollow barking of a dog cameMET from one of the stone sheds , but there was no sign of life around the buildings .
Scaup must be just about the loneliest farm in England , tuckedMET down in the shelter of the hills with Kielder Forest's dark mass blockingMET its southward view and the narrowing valley of the burn fillingMET half the sky to the north .
The East Kielder Burn dividesNONMET here into Scaup Burn and White Kielder Burn .
I droppedNONMET down the hill to fordNONMET White Kielder upstream of the ruined farmstead of Kielder Head , where a line of stunted alders , shaggy with lichen , leaned over their leafless reflections in the peat-brown water .
Spring comesMET late to this wind bitten and rain-soaked valley .
But there were new-born lambs in the sheep pens of Scaup , and a cheery ‘ Hello now ’ from the farmer and his wife tendingNONMET them .
Those were the last human voices I heardNONMET all day .
No-one livesNONMET up >here in the cleft of the White Kielder Burn .
The rough land is altogether too harsh and unyielding , givingMET sustenance only to sheep , and to the conifers high on the flanks of East Kielder Moor and Grey Mares Knowe , immense sweeps of hillside to right and left of the valley .
The footpath on the left bank of the burn was little better than a sheep track , but there were clues to its former importance as a droving road over the hills to Byrness in Redesdale .
Large boulders stood out beside the path as grey blobs in the featureless sheets of pale grass , and flat stones had been placedNONMET as bridges across the burns , their backs hollowedNONMET by the tread of feet through the centuries .
FollowingMET these now disregarded signs of past activity along the old path , I traversedNONMET the hillside and came down to a crumbling stone sheepfold with the roofless remains of a shepherd's hut builtNONMET into one wall .
The tiny single room was jammedNONMET with the mossy timbers of disused sheep pens , but the little iron fire grate that once warmed the hardy men who workedNONMET here was still setNONMET in the foot of the hut's tottering gable end , and the massive stone lintel had not yet fallenNONMET from its place above the doorway .
A dipper flewNONMET up from the burn as I emergedNONMET from the hut , his white breast flashing as he dartedNONMET downstream .
Somewhere ahead in the crags of Kielderhead Moor a hawk was whistlingMET , a piercing sound in the lonely valley , overlainMET for a few heart-stopping moments by the snarl of a jet .
That jarring manifestation of furious technology seemedNONMET as remote and ridiculous as a dream , as silence settledMET down on Kielderhead and the hawk's whistle came down from the moors .
The valley of the White Kielder Burn steepenedNONMET again as I trudgedNONMET north , its curves tightening .
Now the path ranMET through heather high above the burn , past circular sheepfolds long disused and over the stony beds of side streams where the grass hungNONMET smooth and inviting , concealingNONMET ankle-breaking drops .
A mile above the shepherd's hut the hillsides ceasedMET their upward rolling and curved together to formMET a dead-end valley of broad breasted slopes five miles from the nearest tarmac road , hiddenNONMET deep in the folds of the moors .
The old drover's road turned aside here and climbedMET under the rock faces of White Crags to continueNONMET its lonely course over Girdle Fell and down into Redesdale .
I could have goneNONMET with it , givingMET myself four blissful miles of upland walking followedMET by as many miserable hours of fruitless searching for return transport to East Kielder Farm .
Instead I lay back in the heather and savouredMET the trickle of the burn and the crisp smell of peat-laden ground .
Not a sign of spring had yet penetratedMET this secret valley , but another month would putMET that right .
There were five miles of return trampingNONMET to faceMET , but they , too , could waitMET awhile .
Travel : A pilgrimage sans progress Elisabeth de Stroumillo pottersNONMET round Poitou By ELISABETH DE STROUMILLO PEOPLE tendNONMET to lookMET vague when you mentionNONMET Poitou .
‘ Umm … not a part of France we knowNONMET … where exactly is it ?
’ Inland of La Rochelle , you sayNONMET ; north of Cognac and east of Limoges .
You sort of passNONMET it without realisingNONMET , goingNONMET to the Dordogne .
‘ Ah yes — Cognac .
Nice is it ?
’ Well , better than that , and one of the best things about it is the fact that so few people , except the French themselves , botherNONMET with it .
Even for France , the variety to be foundMET is enormous .
My passion is for its numerous Romanesque churches , in most cases humbly proportionedNONMET but elevated into unique works of art by the richness of their exquisitely-sculpted decoration ; to goNONMET to Poitou/Saintonge and not look at any of its churches would be like going to an African game reserve and ignoring the animals .
For serious drinkers there is the production of cognac to investigateNONMET around Cognac , plus the chance to sampleNONMET pineau , the powerful local aperitif made from young wine laced with cognac .
To the north , where Poitou borders on the Vendee , shapely clumps of trees are almost the only punctuation marks on widespreadingNONMET marshy landscapes ; to the south it bubblesMET with little rolling hills .
Water is everywhere : canals , streams , small busy rivers with charming names like the Boutonne , the Mignon and the Belle , and big lazy rivers like the Sevre Niortaise and the Charente .
The lower reaches of the Sevre Niortaise are swollenNONMET with the waters that once covered the whole area , until medieval monks startedNONMET to digNONMET a spider-web of ditches to drainNONMET it .
Now the Marais Poitevin is a pleasantly low profile tourist attraction where you can takeMET canal-boat trips from villages that have hardly changedNONMET in the 15-odd years I've knownNONMET them : Maillezais , with a huge and rather dull ruined abbey , and Coulon , where I first ateNONMET the delicious local version of moules marinieres calledNONMET mouclade .
DriftingMET between grassy polders to which farmers have to ferryNONMET their cattle in punts , or following leafy twisting lanes markedMET only by rusty signs proclaimingMET the ‘ Venise Verte ’ , you're in an all-green , mysteriously silent world ; only the occasional fisherman , twitchingNONMET his rod above the algae- smothered waters , disturbsMET the stillness .
There is more greenery further south in the deep forest of Chize ( with the fine Renaissance chateau of Dampierre-sur-Boutonne at its edge ) ; and more marshes to the west around Rochefort and Marennes , where those mussels and oysters are raisedMET .
One of the region's strangest townlets sitsMET on those marshes : Brouage .
Somnolent now within its low grey walls and stumpy towers , it was once rich on salt , and powerful to boot .
It had a son to be proud of : Samuel Champlain , founder of Quebec , who was bornNONMET there around 1569 .
A century later , it had an adoptive daughter to weepMET for : 20-year-old Marie Mancini , niece of Louis XIV's minister Mazarin .
She wentNONMET there when her romance with the young king was quashedMET for political reasons .
Months later , when Marie had departedNONMET , Louis is saidNONMET to have pausedNONMET nostalgically at Brouage on his way to Paris after marryingNONMET the Spanish Infanta at St Jean-de-Luz .
As you come back from Brouage towards St Jean-d'Angely — on the D18 via the canalside village of Pont-l'Abbe-d'Arnoult , with a lovely Romanesque church faade — a sign at the junction of the D122 pointsMET you to the chateau whose improbably perfect lake and gardens stareMET at you from posters throughout the region : La Roche Courbon .
Its most surprising room , covered from ceiling to floor in 17th-century paintings , should be a salon or library ; instead , a dotty stone bathtub was setNONMET into one wall at a later date by a lady calledNONMET Charlotte .
She never usedNONMET it , having gotMET some of the plumbing details wrong .
Wriggling across country on the D216 to Port-d'Envaux , you comeNONMET to two more chateaux : 18th-century Panloy , flakingNONMET romantically away on its hillock overlookingNONMET a bend in the Charente and , almost next door , the much older , moated Crazannes , half- smothered in amazing flamboyant Gothic carving .
CrossingNONMET the autoroute and turningNONMET north on the D127 bringsMET you to St Jean-d'Angely by way of the isolated church of Fenioux .
Its conically-roofed tower , huggedMET about by a brood of smaller roofs shaped like candle snuffers , is visible for miles .
St Jean-d'Angely is a charming little town : there are good shops as well as half-timbered houses along its narrow old streets , one spannedNONMET by an ancient bell-tower .
There's also a Renaissance fountain , and an extremely odd conglomeration of church buildings comprisingNONMET one ancient ruin , one proper church , and the skeleton faade and nave of a rather pompous and unfinished 18th-century abbey .
It makesMET a conveniently central hub : the Marais Poitevin village of Coulon is 27 miles to the north by the D120 , which inexplicably changesMET its number at the top of a hill to D115 .
Niort is about the same distance by the parallel N150 .
Saintes , with Gallo-Roman remainsNONMET , a beautiful Romanesque abbey and an atmospheric medieval quarter , is 17 miles south of St Jean ; 15-odd miles to the north-west is Surgeres , all of whose public buildings , including an engagingly asymmetrical church , are within the 16th-century castle walls , scatteredNONMET among beautiful gardens and parkland — perfect for picnicking .
Just under 10 miles south-west of St Jean , on the Brouage road , St-Savinien is at the upper limit of the tidal reaches of the Charente .
The villagers ' main hobby seemsNONMET to be fishing with peculiar , saucer shaped nets suspendedNONMET from precariously-perched bankside huts .
One fisherman waxedMET lyrical about the variety of fish in the river .
‘ Even salmon , ’ he assuredNONMET me , ‘ but of course those are protected and must be thrownNONMET back .
Which they are … normalement .
’ LikeNONMET almost every other Poitevin town and village , St-Savinien has a sweet Romanesque church ; Melle , indeed has three .
But Aulnay , just over 10 miles north-east of St Jean , is probably the best , its unassuming architecture a perfect frame for the sheer artistry of the carvings round its doors and windows .
Biblical motifs recurNONMET — some art-experts call them sermons in stone , and their messages would certainly have been clear to the often-illiterate medieval pilgrims trudgingNONMET to Santiago de Compostela in Spain .
But these themes are always interspersedNONMET with more fanciful ones : grimacingMET masks , weird animals , exuberant abstract patterns .
I thinkNONMET those 10th- and 11th-century sculptors were motivatedNONMET not just by piety but also by a certain competitive spirit : if a church was finer than the one in the next village , more pilgrims would surely pauseNONMET there .
Today's attraction- merchants are doing no more to lureNONMET 20th-century tourists than their medieval forebears did for pilgrims .
Way of the World : Farming notes By AUBERON WAUGH MANY will takeMET it as a further surrender to Common Market bureaucracy that an inspectorate will soon be establishedNONMET to regulateMET the smell of farm manure .
In fact , with the development of deep-litter hen houses and intensive pig culture , some such controls are necessary .
The smell releasedMET by a pig or chicken farm is indescribable , and can affectNONMET 10 square miles of countryside around .
One may doubtNONMET whether modern farming has any useful purpose nowadays when everybody is on a diet .
It mostly seemsNONMET to involveMET producing food for animals to eatNONMET , whose excrement is then collectedNONMET to assistMET the growth of more food for animals .
Small children can sometimes be persuadedNONMET to eatNONMET cow cake in the same way that old people will eatNONMET cat food , but the chief result of all this farming was to produceNONMET huge food mountains which we could then refuseNONMET to giveMET to the Third World , or to the socialists of Eastern Europe , in order to teach them the error of their ways .
However , there is a new plan to turnMET land over to wind farming .
It involvesMET nothing more than putting up 80-foot masts all over the land .
A 1,500-acre grouse moor will generateNONMET enough electricity in this way to powerNONMET a town of 6,000 people .
The farmer receivesNONMET a rent of £15,000 a year and is relieved of the need to do any work for it .
All the food we needNONMET will be providedNONMET by monster underground funguses producingNONMET a regular crop of mushrooms without human assistance .
The masts may seemNONMET unsightly to those unused to them , but I am sure it is simply a matter of gettingNONMET accustomed .
Cows were thoughtNONMET very unsightly when they were first introduced .
Nowadays , we all swoon with pleasure at the sight of a cow .
Luxury life awaitsMET private jail inmates By Richard Savill DUVETS , phonecards , hot showers and video films will greetMET inmates at Britain's first privately-run prison when it opensMET on Monday .
The Wolds , a remand centre at Brough , North Humberside , is far removedMET from the insanitary conditions which prevailNONMET at many jails .
The 320 inmates will be allowedNONMET out of their cells for 14 hours a day with a minimum of six hours education and 13 hours exerciseNONMET a week .
The £32 million remand prison has 156 single and 72 shared cells , each with its own lavatory and washbasin .
Recreation areas have telephones and pool tables .
Nail clippers , combs , toothpaste and toothbrushes , razors and washbags are neatly laid out on tables in the cells to awaitMET the arrival of inmates , many of whom will not be carryingNONMET such items because they may not have expectedNONMET to be remandedNONMET in custody .
‘ The cells are luxurious comparedNONMET to some of the things we put up with in the Army , ’ saidNONMET one staff member during a Press tour of the jail .
The prison has a medical block with 24 beds and a gym with equipment that staff said would be the envy of many council leisure centres .
Group 4 Remand Services Ltd , the security firm selectedMET by the Home Office to manageMET The Wolds in a £5 million-a-year contract , likesMET to thinkMET of its prisoners as customers .
‘ It may seemNONMET a little odd for prison staff to be lookingMET at their prisoners as customers , but they are the direct consumers of our service , ’ explainedNONMET Mr Stephen Twinn , prison director , who spentMET 23 years in the public sector at various grades of prison governor .
The 60 male warders or ‘ custody officers ’ as they are calledNONMET , wearNONMET a dapper outfit of black blazers , grey trousers , white shirts and grey tie .
Women managers have a choice as to whether they wearNONMET trousers or a skirt .
Name badges are wornNONMET by staff .
Election 1992 : And what can the politicians do for Meadowell ?
Probably nothing at all ‘ Joyriding ’ riots propelledMET Tyneside's Meadowell Estate to national prominence last September .
Has the election campaign penetratedMET its grim streets ?
By MARTYN HARRIS AT THE drop-in centre on South Meadowell , Labour candidate Paddy Cosgrove has dropped in to meetNONMET the people — mostly fat ladies in shellsuits with laps full of chips .
‘ You all knowNONMET me , ’ saysNONMET Paddy , and a fat lady with good timing saysNONMET , ‘ I don't knowNONMET you .
Never seenNONMET you in me life .
’ On the floor a toddler peelsNONMET more chips from a congealed , bluish mass and feedsNONMET them to a baby .
Another digsMET the cream from the centre of a pink fancy and smearsNONMET it in his hair .
Paddy Cosgrove , councillor and barrister , in candidates ' pinstripes , sitsNONMET tensely on the edge of his plastic chair .
‘ I'm a regular visitor to this estate … ’ ‘ Who does he sayNONMET he is ?
’ saysNONMET a second fat lady .
‘ That Liberal , Paddy Ashgrove … ’ ‘ He's better lookingNONMET on TV … ’ ‘ He's only comeNONMET because the press are here , ’ saysNONMET the first fat lady .
And Paddy Cosgrove blushes .
Political consciousness is low on the Meadowell Estate .
Turnout at the last election was around 50 per cent , and with the thinning of the electoral roll broughtMET by the poll tax , will be even lower this time .
They are mostly Labour voters but several confuseNONMET their Labour candidate with the leader of the Liberal Democrats .
Very few knowNONMET their MP is a Conservative , and hardly anyone that his name is Neville Trotter , defender of a slender 2,500 majority .
By most measures Meadowell is the worst council estate in Britain , and probably the most notorious since the riots last September , which followedMET the deaths of joyriders Colin Atkins and Dale Robson in a police chase .
In fact Meadowell is an Elastoplast name like Sizewell , invented in the 1970s to disguiseMET what was already a running sore .
When builtNONMET in 1938 it was The Ridges , which is still what they callNONMET it locally — a slum clearance project on the north bank of the Tyne , 10 miles east of Newcastle .
Its first inhabitants were shipyard and fishquay workers from the riverside towns of North Shields and Wallsend , who movedNONMET happily from their tumbledown terraces to these fine new houses with inside toilets and gardens .
Many , like Ronnie Collyer , a retired shipyard worker , still liveNONMET here and are still proud of the place .
All the trouble , saysNONMET Ronnie , is down to ‘ a few families who doan't keepNONMET their young ’ uns in order .
And then the media coomMET down and blowMET everything up .
’ He has polishedNONMET shoes , a close shave , and too much pride for a free drink .
‘ It's a canny place The Ridges , with plenty of good folk .
’ But something was wrong from the start .
Some sayNONMET it was the importing of whole streets of fighting families from the fishquays , with their dockland diversions of prostitution , drug-dealing and handling .
Others sayNONMET it was the shortage of pubs , shops , churches , transport and police stations .
By the 1950s , The Ridges was the criminal ghetto of Newcastle , and by the 1970s a costly council manicure job had turnedNONMET it into a free-fire zone .
Paths and boundaries vanishedMET , allowingMET the tides of street life to washMET right up to the doorsteps .
Joyriders used front lawns to practiseNONMET their handbrake turns .
Car theft becameNONMET so common that private cars virtually disappeared from the area .
Shops like greengrocers and chippies , with pitiful cash takings , were routinely subjectedNONMET to armed robberies with shotguns , balaclavas — the whole bit .
When I askNONMET the fat ladies at the drop-in centre what is the one thing that would do most to improveNONMET the estate they sayNONMET ‘ getNONMET ridNONMET of the kids ’ and they are only half jokingNONMET .
The age structure of Meadowell meansMET it is awash with teenagers , whose only pastimes are having babies and body-building .
Do your husbands comeNONMET here ?
I askNONMET , and they all laugh .
‘ The men are all useless — sittingNONMET indoors if there's trouble in the street .
It's women have to goNONMET out and dealMET with it .
’ By the time of the riots a quarter of all houses on the estate were boarded up and burned out by infant petrol bombers .
Unemployment was 80 per cent on some streets .
In Meadowell Primary , which has 232 children , every one was receivingNONMET a clothing grant .
The area had effectively been abandonedMET by the authorities , a fact which becameNONMET clear during the riot itself , when police waitedNONMET five hours to enterNONMET the estate and putMET down the disturbances .
‘ And there were never more than a few dozen ringleaders , ’ Bob Mather , a local butcher , tellsNONMET me .
‘ I was stoodNONMET outside me shop all night , and most were no more than kids .
’ Eight months on and little has changedNONMET — if anything it is rather worse .
Unemployment is up another 17 per cent ; more houses and shops are boarded up ; burglaries and joyriding continueNONMET — and if there is less ram-raiding it is only because 50 or so of the hardest cases are still behind bars .
A food co-op which triedMET to replaceNONMET the burned-out shops has been closedNONMET after several break-ins , and even the drop-in centre is burgled weekly , according to project worker Sheila Auld .
There is a new phone box , ripped from the wall and lyingNONMET on the floor of her office to proveNONMET it .
Meadowell has even discoveredMET a new martyr in the shape of one Willy Hunter , a local hard nut awaitingNONMET trial for murder , and allegedly the victim of a police frame-up .
‘ Free Willy Hunter ’ sayMET the graffiti , next to the old , fadingNONMET graffiti for Dale Robson and Colin Atkins .
My friend Kevin , muscleman and minicab driver , saysNONMET the lads would be out rioting for Willy now if it wasn't tippingMET down with rain the whole time .
A few things have been achievedNONMET , I supposeNONMET .
There are some posh flats goingNONMET up  at neighbouring Royal Quays which will provideNONMET building jobs : ‘ It's Sun City in the middle of Bantustan , ’ a Labour councillor saidNONMET to me .
The Cheviot housing association is slowly taking over property in South Meadowell .
A new police station is to be builtNONMET .
The government sponsoredNONMET Meadowell Initiative makesMET noises in the north of the estate — but does pitifully little , painfully slowly .
North Tyneside council saysMET it is too starved of funds by central government to do much .
Tory ministers , like Michael Heseltine who visitedNONMET Meadowell last November , sayNONMET the cash shortages are due to council profligacy and bad management .
MP Neville Trotter is a pear-shaped Tory with pear-shaped vowels who has little appeal to the people of Meadowell , and a dwindling appeal in the middle-class suburbs where unemployment is also climbingMET .
Paddy Cosgrove , his likely replacement , is a council hack of 21 years standing and ideal backbench fodder , though it is hard to imagineNONMET him leadingMET a crusade for Meadowell .
When I askNONMET the people of the estate what they wantNONMET from this election some sayNONMET they wantNONMET Cheviot to rebuildMET it and others that it would be better grassed over .
Some sayNONMET they should bringMET back hanging ; others sayNONMET it is the politicians they should hangNONMET ; but most sayNONMET there is nothing anybody can do at all .
General Election : N Trotter ( C ) 25,113 , P Cosgrove ( Lab ) 22,530 , D Mayhew ( L/All ) 10,446 .
Con Maj : 2,583 .
SitMET , they saidNONMET , but he wouldn't This week John Major beganNONMET to appearNONMET on a different kind of box .
In the last of his series on the leaders , Frank Johnson reports By FRANK JOHNSON WE WERE in the West Country .
The Prime Minister was on his soapbox .
Just up the road , at Langport in Somerset , was the birthplace of Walter Bagehot ( 1826–1877 ) , although as he directedMET his microphone at Liberal Democrat hecklers John Major had other things on his mind .
The relevance is that Bagehot was the first political commentator .
The travelling chaos of a modern party leader's election entourage had carriedMET Major within a few miles of the home of the founder of the profession , a few of whose more troublesome contemporary practitioners are saidNONMET to have causedNONMET him much irritation over the 16 months of his premiership .
‘ A Liberal ?
He's admittedMET to being a Liberal !
’ Major criedNONMET , jabbingNONMET a finger in the direction of one heckler .
The man had a Liberal Democrat rosette pinnedNONMET to his cap .
He was also carryingNONMET an orange poster on a pole , urgingMET a vote for the local Liberal Democrat candidate .
Therefore the admission which the Prime Minister wrung from him could hardly be saidNONMET to have been grudging .
But , like all the best soapbox orators , Major had preparedMET his repartee in advance .
‘ I knewNONMET there was one here , ’ he continuedNONMET , meaningNONMET Liberal Democrats .
There were , in fact , about a score .
Then cameMET the passage , which appearedNONMET on the television news that evening and in the papers the next day , about the Liberal Democrats being the Trojan horse that would letMET Labour in .
There were also some lines intended for local consumption : ‘ Higher petrol prices from the Liberal Democrats … that's not gonNONMET na helpMET a rural area … ’ What would Bagehot have madeMET of him ?
Like the heckler , he was a Liberal .
There the similarity ends , since judgingMET from his writings Bagehot was a roaring snob , whereas judgingMET from his heckles the heckler was not .
More to the point , it was Bagehot who saidNONMET : ‘ A constitutional statesman is in general a man of common opinions and uncommon abilities .
’ The statesman to whom he was referringMET was Peel .
A political commentator of our own day , Paul Johnson , quotedNONMET it not long after Major becameNONMET Prime Minister to suggestMET that it was also true of him .
But is it still ?
B AGEHOT 'S phrase comesMET in a passage in which he appearsNONMET to propoundNONMET the dispiriting theory that a politician , if he wantsNONMET to getMET anywhere , must appealMET to ‘ the average man ’ .
The average man is ‘ a cool , common person , with a considerate air , with figures in his mind , with his own business to attendMET to , with a set of ordinary opinions arisingMET from and suited to ordinary life .
He can't bearMET novelty or originalities … Original theories giveMET trouble ’ .
Bagehot goesMET on to sayNONMET of Peel : ‘ From a certain peculiarity of intellect and fortune , he was never in advance of his time .
Of almost all the great measures with which his name is associated , he attainedNONMET great eminence as an opponent before he attainedNONMET even greater eminence as their advocate .
’ That last sentence has more to do with Kinnock than with Major .
It is also a warning to all hack Tories who thinkNONMET that it is a telling blow against Kinnock to keep on pointingMET out that he has reversedMET his opinions about unilateral nuclear disarmament , British membership of the EC , or anything else .
But the most striking thing about Bagehot's essay on Peel , in the light of the last full week of this election campaign , is that it simply does not applyMET to Major at all .
Common opinions were what gotMET Major into difficulties in the first place .
Between his becoming Prime Minister and his party's fall in the polls about 10 days ago , Major did nearly everthing that common opinion wantedMET him to do .
This was true of what he did about both high policy and low politics .
For example , on high policy common opinion saidMET that there was nothing for it but to stayMET in the ERM .
He stayedMET in , and the recession worsened .
In low politics , common opinion — no less common for being expensively hiredMET by Conservative Central Office — encouragedMET him in the belief that he should fightMET much of the election sitting down .
He did so , and he lookedNONMET like the questioner in the studio audience rather than the answerer .
The result was Wobbly Week , the second week of the campaign .
But last Saturday Major climbedMET on to that soapbox in Luton .
Until then , he had been that most inhuman of creatures — the public figure describedNONMET by others as ‘ very human ’ .
Now he really was human — unscripted , jokey , even a bit passionate .
The jubilant word from Kinnock's camp was that Major was behavingNONMET more like an opposition leader than a prime minister .
But there seemedNONMET nothing wrong with the head of government appearingNONMET to be the challenger on the hustings .
President Truman did so in a campaign which no-one expectedNONMET him to winNONMET , and he wonNONMET .
It is justified if the head of government is challenging something powerful .
Kinnock complainsNONMET of the alleged power of the Tory tabloid press , but he has powers on his side too .
Ninety per cent of his party's cash comesMET from the unions , which will expectMET a return .
The British people have in the past foundMET them rather more powerful than the corporations which are popularly supposed to financeNONMET the Conservative party .
Then there are all those schoolteachers , dons , television producers , writers on arts pages and members of the agitating classes who wantMET a Labour win in order to imposeNONMET Political Correctness .
That is to say , they will have what the Jesuits once attachedMET such importance to : power over young or impressionable minds .
As the week wentMET by , Major rejectedNONMET common opinion about two other large subjects : proportional representation and Scottish devolution .
He hardenedMET his opposition to both , despite the fact that his own party chairman had once favouredNONMET the first , and vocal forces within his Scottish party were in support of the second .
E VEN at this late hour , psephology , demographics and luck suggestMET that the Tories could still emergeMET as the biggest single party in a hung Parliament .
Is it possible that Major would rather goMET into opposition — with the dangers that would meanMET for his continued leadership of the Conservative party — than offer PR and Scottish devolution to the Liberal Democrats ?
If so , we are dealingMET with a more Quixotic , romantic or principled figure than some of us used to thinkNONMET .
Once that soapbox cameMET out , Major campaignedNONMET as if he would now do and sayNONMET what he really thoughtNONMET .
Was it too late ?
From Central Office , and from around his entourage , cameMET the unmistakable signs of fair weather friends preparingMET to detachMET themselves from blame for defeat .
And then , on Thursday morning , when Major's election tour reachedMET the Daily Mail Ideal Home Exhibition , Sir David English , the paper's editor , was not there to greetNONMET him .
A junior spin doctor is reportedNONMET to have muttered , though admittedly out of my earshot : ‘ We've been snubbedNONMET .
’ Not Sir David !
Some in the profession of political commentating would optNONMET for Bagehot as their formative influence , but mine has long been Sir David — a founder of biased Tory journalism .
His lack of humbug about political balance has always madeMET him more honest than all the employees of BBC Current Affairs awaitingNONMET with glee the Kinnock years .
Eventually , Sir David's office issuedMET a statement about the Prime Minister .
Normally , a prime minister's office would issueMET a statement about an editor .
But Major makesMET a point of not being grand , and with Sir David it is the other way about .
‘ Sir David English was not informedNONMET of the visit and in consequence had no plans to attendNONMET the Ideal Home Exhibition that day , ’ the official statement announced .
Faith in Sir David's leadership was restored .
Scientists clickMET over a way to saveNONMET dolphins by Greg Neale Environment Correspondent HUNDREDS of thousands of dolphins could be savedNONMET from death thanks to pioneering work by British scientists .
They believeNONMET they have foundMET a cheap , practical means of preventingNONMET dolphins entanglingNONMET themselves in monofilament drift fishing nets — the ‘ walls of death ’ believed to be responsible for killingNONMET large numbers of dolphins off Cornwall this year .
But their work is hamperedMET by lack of money .
So far they have receivedMET nothing from the Government , little EC assistance and are runningMET out funds donatedMET by individuals and industry .
The researchers , headedMET by Dr Margaret Klinowska , a Cambridge biologist , and David Goodson , an expert on acoustic engineering at Loughborough University , sayMET new data showsMET that plastic sound reflectors to fishing nets can warnMET dolphins of hazards .
Data to be publishedNONMET shortly draws on experiments including observations of Freddy , the dolphin that has been livingNONMET off the Northumbrian coast for four years .
UsingNONMET equipment donatedMET by Racal , the scientists have analysedNONMET recordings of the ‘ clicking ’ dolphins makeNONMET while hunting .
Observations of Freddy ledMET them to concludeNONMET that dolphins use sonar while hunting .
They emitNONMET an intense , broad-band ‘ click ’ or pulse of sound .
Echoes of the signal alertMET them to possible prey , at ranges up to 80–90 metres in shallow waters .
Mr Goodson , who becameNONMET interested in the sonar capacity of dolphins after hearingNONMET one while swimmingNONMET off the Welsh coast , has experimentedMET with various shapes of sound reflectors .
The most promising is eliptical , about 3½in long .
The theory is that its internal air pocket will ‘ bounceMET ’ back the dolphin's sonar signal , regardless of the direction of approach .
Last autumn , Dr Klinowska , Mr Goodson and their team putMET the theories into practice .
In the Moray Firth , they placedNONMET a ‘ headline barrier ’ , from which they had suspendedNONMET reflectors at two-metre intervals .
The movement of dolphins around the barrier was observedNONMET , usingNONMET electronic equipment to monitorNONMET sonar activity .
‘ The results exceededNONMET our expectations , ’ saidNONMET Mr Goodson .
Dolphins swimmingNONMET near the barrier alteredNONMET their behaviour to avoidNONMET it , the result , the scientists believeNONMET , of them detectingMET sonar echoes from the reflectors .
Dr Klinowska saidNONMET that , although it was necessary to be cautious about the findings , a combination of reflector devices and some modification of fishing gear might reduceMET deaths .
But the Moray Firth experiments were only possible after the naturalist Dr David Bellamy helpedNONMET secureMET a donation from the Co-operative Wholesale Society .
‘ Our work is being delayedNONMET simply through the lack of funding , ’ saidNONMET Dr Klinowska .
The scientists hopeNONMET to raiseMET £100,000 through an appeal by Windsor Safari Park .
Donations can be madeMET to the Dolphin Research Project c/o Windsor Safari Park , Windsor , Berkshire SL4 4AY .
The Arts : Courtroom drama in the case of the bogus Picassos By MICHAEL PYE SUPPOSENONMET you have a print by Picasso , Dali , Miro or Chagall , or soldNONMET one in the past few years : you have a special interest in a Brooklyn courtroom this week .
Hilda Amiel , alleged to be the very godmother of fake art , has been arraignedNONMET for her part in what the US Attorney callsNONMET the ‘ single largest worldwide source and distribution network of bogus prints ’ .
( She pleadsNONMET not guilty .
) The Feds claim to have seizedNONMET 75,000 prints at the family firm , knownNONMET with a nice irony as Original Artworks Ltd .
They sayMET there were blank sheets bearingMET Dali's signature alongside 20,000 fake Miros and 650 fake Chagalls .
The Picassos , according to Sotheby's valuer , were ‘ sloppy ’ .
Amiel is the first reputable dealer to be prosecutedNONMET , but more than 100 others as well as auction houses across America are now under subpoena to explainMET what they thoughtMET they were sellingMET .
And the prints have been soldNONMET across Europe — there's been one arrest in Denmark already — including Britain .
The art world is very close to its own Watergate .
THE St Petersburg National Opera ( the ‘ National ’ ) , Chaliapin's company , is in New York for the first time .
The management of the Kirov , that other opera house in St Petersburg , are furious .
The core of the problem is simple : the National was invitedMET to New York only last November , and the Kirov is planningMET to tourNONMET this summer .
Both are presentingMET the great Russian warhorses , Boris Godunov and The Queen of Spades .
Both companies expected to bringMET the bass Vladimir Ognovenko to singNONMET Boris and the mezzo-soprano Irina Bogatcheva .
( Russian singers don't spendMET their lives with one company any more .
) But Kirov's management , Satra Arts International , feltMET badly upstagedNONMET .
Under pressure from Satra , Kirov toldMET singers to chooseNONMET between the companies .
The National's Boris Godunov was builtMET around Ognovenko ; he had to stayMET home .
The mezzo Irina Bogatcheva , wife of the National's artistic director Stanislav Gaudassinksy , agreed to limitNONMET her roles .
But that wasn't enough .
For daring to comeNONMET at all , she was cutMET from the Kirov team .
She wentNONMET home in tears at the weekend .
But her husband did have consolation on Saturday , as we talkedNONMET over Scotch and Peking duck : the sound of American cheers for his robust version of Boris Godunov .
LA MAMA ETC — for ‘ Experimental Theatre Company ’ — is a tiny cauldron of a theatre on the Lower East Side , the creation of the extraordinary Ellen Stewart .
Like any house that's demanding , idiosyncratic , small and truly experimental , it's in trouble — $150,000 in the red , with the serious prospect of closing .
La Mama is the heart of the New York theatre avant-garde , a true anti-institution .
But it has distinguishedNONMET alumni : Billy Crystal , who talkedNONMET between the Oscars , and Oscar contenders Bette Midler and Nick Nolte among them .
You might expectNONMET them to rushMET to La Mama's aid .
But Stewart snapsMET : ‘ I don't wantNONMET to be disappointed so I'm not goingNONMET to askMET for their help .
’ Instead , she's been savedNONMET for the moment by an old-fashioned storyteller , worth millions — George Lucas of Star Wars .
And virtue is rewardedMET .
Nolte , Midler , and Crystal don't even winNONMET Oscars .
Lucas did .
IN THE crusade to makeMET everyone guilty about everything , there is a new technique : tetranalysis , the study of colour , sound , motion and form in movies .
The National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People triedMET it to scourge Hollywood ; but Hollywood just giggledMET .
The NAACP denouncesMET The Silence of the Lambs because Hannibal the Cannibal sharesMET his name with an African general , and the killer is Buffalo Bill ( yes , that's a white man's nickname , but the buffalo , NAACP explainMET patiently , is associatedNONMET with Native Americans ) .
It getsNONMET worse .
In Bugsy , limos are black , cars are red and taxis are yellow ; all are ominous objects , the NAACP saysMET , in colours associatedNONMET with racial minorities .
Political correctness , just as we suspectedNONMET , will be perfectly grey .
The Arts : In the name of charity By LEWIS JONES CHARITY is a divine attribute , but we are enjoined to giveNONMET forgetfully lest we fallMET into the absurd error of mistakingNONMET ourselves for gods .
The perils of ignoringNONMET this advice were well illustratedMET by Angel of Bengal ( C4 ) , the True Stories documentary by Anna Raphael which was by turns hilarious and enraging .
The ‘ angel ’ in question was an American woman who callsNONMET herself Rytasha .
Apart from a particularly vicious nose-job and alarming turquoise-coloured contact lenses , Rytasha is rather beautiful , and in the 1970s , when she wentMET by the name of Ricki , she was a successful model ( she beganNONMET life as Maxine Shenkman ) .
An earlier film by Raphael , The Persuaders ( 1986 ) , chartedMET the transformation of Ricki into Rytasha , which occurredMET at the Hare Krishna Temple in London , and her uneasy relationship with her guru there .
It would have been interesting to have seenNONMET the two films together .
Since 1986 Rytasha has brokenMET away from her guru and setMET up on her own with a charity calledNONMET Food Relief International , which raisesMET money from the fiercely competitive matrons of Palm Beach and distributesMET it to the starving people of Bangladesh .
‘ She adawsNONMET Bangladesh , ’ gushedMET Rytasha's mother — the fiercest matron of them all , rejoicingNONMET in the improbable title of Baroness Thea von Theilheimer Shenkman .
She wentMET on to listNONMET her daughter's achievements : ‘ She put in an irritation system … ’ With no trace of a smile or a blush the baroness quickly corrected herself — ‘ an irrigation system ’ — but the slip was a telling one , and I'm sure they would have appreciatedNONMET it in Bangladesh .
The villagers of Ramsala , recipients of the Palm Beach dollars , explained to the cameras that they desperately neededNONMET a clinic .
‘ We toldNONMET her that a mud hut would do , but she saidNONMET no , she'd buildNONMET something pukka .
’ A pukka building was duly erectedNONMET , but its medical function has somehow been indefinitely postponed .
It is devoted instead to the worship of the charitable Rytasha , who is not content simply to hand over the cash but insistsNONMET , in an unfortunate hangover from her Hare Krishna days , on posturingNONMET as ‘ a spiritual master ’ .
The villagers seemedNONMET unimpressed , but were givenMET no choice in the matter .
Nor could the vaunted irrigation schemeNONMET be  describedNONMET as an unqualified success .
The money ran out before the scheme's completion , and the villagers found themselves obliged to borrowNONMET the rest .
They beggedNONMET Rytasha for reimbursement , but none was forthcoming , and for the want of a few hundred pounds the village lostMET its crop for the year .
‘ Now what are we supposed to do ?
’ askedNONMET one of them .
‘ Are we to sellNONMET our cattle or our land ?
’ The most irritating thing about Rytasha — and there were many — was that , though she does not speakNONMET their language , she presumesNONMET to teachNONMET them a spurious form of their own religion .
‘ One thing we don't needNONMET in this subcontinent , ’ Professor Rokeya Kabeer observedNONMET , ‘ is spiritual guidance — we have gurus a dime a dozen .
’ They are far too civilised for that sort of thing in Bangladesh , but I keptNONMET thinkingNONMET wistfully of T. S. Eliot's lines in Sweeney Agonistes about ‘ a nice little white little missionary stew ’ .
City Comment : There's spring in the step of the stock market AT LEAST last Friday's post-election stock market surge was not a one-day special offer for the professionals only .
Prices have remainedNONMET high the FT-SE index has risenMET another 55 points since then — allowingMET even the most passive of private investors , including unit trust holders , to takeMET advantage of the market .
The 10 p.c. gain since election day is lookingMET increasingly sustainable .
It is not that prospects for earnings are 10 p.c. better that they were in the middle of last week , but it is possible to argueNONMET that prospects are that much better than they would have been under a Labour government and that the market was discountingMET such a result .
The FT-SE failed to holdMET its gains yesterday but shortly after openingMET it was only six points away from last September's previous record closing level .
Wall Street has been hittingMET new peaks this week too , which has givenMET support to the London market ( and even Japan's Nikkei index , in a typically erratic period , has gainedMET nearly 800 points while London addedMET its 245 ) but London has real strengths of its own .
The City view is that the fall in corporate earnings has stoppedMET and that next year's increase could be around 15 p.c .
The market's price- earnings multiple was 16 last night but it would dropMET below 14 if that increase in earnings really happensNONMET .
The increase will not be matchedMET by dividend rises — too many companies have been payingMET more than they could affordMET over the past two years and need to repairMET their reserves and ratios — but 7 p.c. growth looksMET reasonable .
The market yield , a historic 4¾ p.c. , could returnMET back above 5 p.c. , therefore givingMET basic-rate taxpayers a real return with the prospect of real growth too .
Not all problems have goneMET away of course : yesterday's £6.4 billion public sector borrowing requirement is not much higher than expectations , but it is almost as large as the deficit for the previous 11 months and — with this year's deficit forecast to be double last year's — showsMET why the Bank of England so eagerly sold £2 billion or more of gilts on election night and why it needsMET a regular stream of massive sales .
The change in employment may not always be so favourable as yesterday's either , but the market is now startingMET to feelMET bullish and lookingMET for a FT-SE of 3,000 by next year .
City : Lloyd's members failNONMET in bid to protectNONMET cash fund By Karen Cooper MORE than 800 Lloyd's of London members on syndicates managedMET by the loss-making Gooda Walker agency have failedNONMET in their legal attempt to preventNONMET Lloyd's and members ' agents from drawingMET down their funds .
Michael Freeman , the solicitor who advisedNONMET the members on court action , saidNONMET yesterday : ‘ This will causeNONMET the most dreadful hardship .
There is goingNONMET to be a great deal of pain in the market place now .
’ In an earlier than expected Commercial Court judgment , Mr Justice Saville foundMET that the members had not producedMET enough evidence of irregularities in the ‘ LMX spiral ’ , which sendsMET catastrophe risks swirlingMET round the market to stopMET the usual process of callingMET on cash deposits to makeMET good syndicate losses .
However , he suggestedNONMET there was perhaps a need to lookMET into the system more closely .
Costs were awardedNONMET to the members ' agents but not to Lloyd's .
The members , many of whom are unable to fulfilNONMET the latest £101m cash call due on March 2 to coverMET 1989–90 losses on syndicates were seekingMET an interim injunction to stopMET members ' agents and Lloyd's dipping into their security .
They were challengingMET the ‘ pay now sueNONMET later ’ principle at Lloyd's , which saysMET names should payMET cash calls first and fightMET them later .
Lloyd's chairman David Coleridge welcomedMET the judgment .
‘ We have every sympathy with those who have madeMET substantial underwriting losses in recent years but Lloyd's owesMET its first duty to policyholders with valid claims which must be metMET , ’ he saidNONMET .
Mr Freeman saidNONMET an appeal was ‘ most unlikely , because we are not goingNONMET to getMET any more evidence .
’ Earlier this month , preliminary findings from an investigation by Kenneth Randall foundMET that the Gooda Walker agency may have overstatedMET its syndicates ' profits between 1981 and 1988 through the use of time and distance policies , about which it had failedMET to informNONMET its auditors in at least one syndicate .
Peter Nutting , who ledMET the association of Outhwaite members to a succesful settlement , saidNONMET he sympathisedNONMET with Gooda Walker names , but ‘ if the names were not goingNONMET to payMET these calls , who did they thinkNONMET was goingNONMET to payNONMET them ?
’ Meanwhile , members who were not part of the £116m Outhwaite out-of-court settlement have votedNONMET to pressMET their claims for compensation through the 1992 Outhwaite Names Association .
It plansMET to issueNONMET a protective writ but is hopingMET to achieveMET a settlement .
‘ The NHS is not for sale ’ Virginia Bottomley talks to George Jones in her first interview since joiningMET the Cabinet By GEORGE JONES THE NEW Health Secretary , Mrs Virginia Bottomley , setMET herself an ambitious target yesterday — to ‘ takeMET the politics ’ out of the National Health Service .
But her desire to provideNONMET a period of stability for nearly one million people employedMET by the NHS is coupledMET with a fierce determination to maintainMET the momentum of reform , with the overwhelming majority of hospitals becomingNONMET self-governing trusts by the mid-1990s .
Labour sought to turnMET the general election into a referendum on the NHS , askingMET voters for a mandate to reverseMET the changes .
Mrs Bottomley is convinced the Tory victory providesNONMET the opportunity to entrenchNONMET the reforms — and to giveMET doctors , nurses and managers the confidence to makeMET them workMET .
In her first full interview since being appointed Health Secretary , she saidNONMET the election result , and Mr Major's unequivocal commitment to the NHS , had finally ‘ nailedMET the lie ’ about privatisation of health care .
‘ The NHS is not for profit .
It is not for sale .
It will continueNONMET to be true to its founding principles , available to all and free at the point of delivery , ’ she saidNONMET .
She recalledMET a promise madeMET by Mr Major when he becameNONMET Prime Minister : that he would workNONMET for a nation at ease with itself .
‘ I wantNONMET to seeMET a health service at ease with itself — optimistic and confident about its essential work .
Health is something which touchesMET every individual and family in the country , ’ she saidNONMET .
‘ But there must be changes .
An organisation that doesn't changeNONMET fossilises .
Health needsNONMET to developNONMET and  alterNONMET .
’ By next year , she is confident that two thirds of hospitals will have becomeNONMET self-governing trusts within the NHS .
She pledgedMET that the Government would safeguardNONMET those that did not optMET for trust status , but she expectedNONMET this to be a minority .
The Government will also encourageMET more family doctors to holdMET budgets to ‘ buyNONMET ’ services for patients , and is lookingMET at ways to enableMET smaller practices to teamMET up to secureMET the >advantages of fund holding .
The election result has givenMET the Conservatives five years in which to pressMET ahead with the changes .
Most people are likely to judgeNONMET the reforms on how long they have to waitNONMET for treatment — the issue behind the ‘ Jennifer's ear ’ controversy during the election campaign .
Mrs Bottomley stressedMET her commitment to the Patient's Charter , which has already eliminatedNONMET almost all waits of more than two years for NHS operations .
The next step is to ensureNONMET that , from March , no one should have to waitNONMET more than 18 months for a hip or knee replacement or a cataract operation .
A national standard will also be setMET for outpatient waiting times .
Mrs Bottomley's first big test as Health Secretary will comeMET this summer with the annual public spendingNONMET round , which will be conductedMET against a background of concern over high Government borrowing and pressure from the Tory Right for public spending cuts .
The Conservative manifesto containedMET a commitment to increaseNONMET , year by year , the level of ‘ real resources ’ committedMET to the NHS — though it putMET no figure on the extra money to be allocatedNONMET .
Mrs Bottomley , representingNONMET ‘ caring Conservatism ’ , will faceNONMET Mr Michael Portillo , the new Treasury Chief Secretary , who is equally keen to establishNONMET his Right- wing credentials by demonstratingNONMET he can keepMET keep a tight grip on the public purse strings .
She acknowledgedNONMET that there could be difficult times ahead .
‘ It will always be the case that the holder of my office will needNONMET to fightMET the corner of the health service and there will always , inevitably , be more than we can do .
’ But she stressedMET there would be no let-up in the search for greater efficiency .
As well as fightingMET for more money , her task was to ensureNONMET that ‘ every last pound ’ was spentNONMET as effectively as it could be .
Her priorities includeNONMET givingMET more encouragement to medical research ; emphasis on preventive health to makeMET the NHS a ‘ health as well as a sickness service ’ , with the publication shortly of new national targets for reducing deaths from heart disease and cancers ; and pressingMET ahead with care in the community .
As a former psychiatric social worker , Mrs Bottomley is determined to improveNONMET standards of care for mentally ill and handicapped people .
‘ It is not acceptable to have people who requireNONMET a home confinedNONMET to long-stay institutions when they could be in more domestic settings .
That is a real challenge , ’ she saidNONMET .
Mrs Bottomley's rise to the top has been swift , with only four years between her first ministerial post and a seat at the Cabinet table .
But she bridlesNONMET at suggestions that the inclusion of two women — Mrs Gillian Shephard at the Department of Employment and herself — has excludedNONMET more able men from the Cabinet .
‘ Prime Ministers always have to considerMET balance in the Cabinet — and at least we now have the same number of women as old Etonians in John Major's team , ’ she saidNONMET .
a Non-punitive Paradigm of Probation Practice : Some Sobering Thoughts L.R. SINGER Lawrence Singer is an Assistant Chief Probation Officer with Merseyside Probation Service .
Beforehand he workedNONMET as a probation officer for Berkshire Probation Service and later as a research officer for Somerset Probation Service where he undertookNONMET the research reported here .
The paradigm which is describedNONMET originatesMET from doctoral research into generic probation practice and has been presentedMET in a book Adult Probation and Juvenile Supervision : Beyond the Care-Control Dilemma ( 1989 , Gower ) .
SUMMARY The Government White Paper Crime , Justice and ProtectingNONMET the Public proposesMET a radical change for probation practice .
Henceforth probation work will no longer be an alternative to punishment but an alternative form of punishment .
This article challengesMET the conceptual and practical appropriateness of applyingMET the notion of punishment to the probation context .
Probation officers , it is arguedNONMET , are concerned with establishingNONMET rules for probationers and not inflictingNONMET pain on them .
An alternative non-punitive paradigm of probation practice is describedNONMET .
The paradigm is basedMET on the joint supervisory aims of support and surveillance which are implementedNONMET through the methods of counselling , assistingNONMET , directingNONMET , and monitoring .
To illustrateMET the paradigm , reference is madeMET to an alcohol education course developedNONMET for offenders in trouble through drink .
The efficacy of the alcohol project and the non-punitive paradigm is demonstratedNONMET by the results reportedNONMET from a three year evaluation study coveringMET 152 offenders .
The article concludesMET with an affirmation of the disciplined but non-punitive character of current probation work and arguesMET that , to successfully protectNONMET the public and reintegrate offenders into the community , the probation officer's employment of established social work knowledge , skills , and values is a strength not a weakness .
The aim of this article is to challengeMET the assertion contained in the White Paper Crime , Justice and ProtectingNONMET the Public ( Home Office , 1990a ) that probation practice can be conceivedMET of as a form of punishment in the community .
Issue will be takenMET with the appropriateness of applyingMET the concept of punishment to the probation context through reference to a demanding and successful probation project concerned with offenders in trouble through drink .
In describingNONMET the project , a non-punitive model for understanding probation practice will be developedNONMET .
This non-punitive paradigm will provideMET a framework for contrastingNONMET the efficacy of current practice with future plans inappropriately to transformMET probation work into ‘ a new approach to punishment in the community ’ ( p. 18 , para. 4.3 ) .
The punitive approach anticipated for the Probation Service in the White Paper is underpinnedMET by a definition of punishment that residesMET ‘ in the restrictions on liberty and in the enforcement of the orders ’ .
The White Paper goesMET on to emphasizeMET : ‘ It is the loss of liberty involvedNONMET in carryingNONMET out the terms of the order rather than the activities carriedNONMET out during the order which is the punishment ’ ( p. 18 , para. 4.4 ) .
Notwithstanding the popular appeal and political capital to be derivedNONMET from such a humane -sounding statement , this definition is nevertheless at variance with the traditional understanding of the meaning of punishment .
Discourses on punishment and dictionary definitions of the term clearly specifyNONMET the central feature of punishment as being the infliction of pain rather than the loss of liberty per se ( Hudson , 1987 ) .
The conceptual and practical implications of this discrepancy will be examinedNONMET in the third and final section of this article .
Beforehand , however , consideration will be givenMET first to the probation project and second to its evaluation .
In these sections punishment will be understoodNONMET to meanNONMET the infliction of pain and the review of the project will seekMET to demonstrateNONMET that the probation practice describedNONMET is not only more demanding but also more effective than this traditional understanding of punishment .
At a time when the Home Secretary is invitingMET the Probation Service to ‘ moveMET centre stage in the Criminal Justice System ’ ( NACRO , 1990 , p. 17 ) it may seemNONMET misguided and unnecessarily pedantic to takeMET issue with the White Paper's notion of punishment .
Punishment is just a word after all : nothing more than convenient political rhetoric meritingNONMET only lip service from probation managers and practitioners poisedNONMET at the ‘ window of opportunity ’ .
However , this failsNONMET to acknowledgeNONMET a fundamental axiom of social work practice ; namely that language not only reflectsMET but also shapes social reality .
As Davies ( 1981 ) has pointedMET out , speech is the basic tool of the social worker .
What we sayNONMET influences what we thinkNONMET and in turn , what we do .
If punishment is assimilatedMET into the probation glossary it will inevitably influenceNONMET the sort of practice the Service undertakesMET .
In the sections to followMET the stark question is therefore putMET ‘ Is the Probation Service in the business of inflictingNONMET pain ?
’ and the answer which unfoldsMET may be summarizedNONMET ‘ No , because it neither aspiresMET nor wishesMET to !
’ THE PROJECT : MORE DEMANDING THAN PUNISHMENT Government concern about the problem of drink-related offending is as old as the Probation Service .
Indeed , as Bochel ( 1976 ) has shownMET , the establishment of a Probation Service in England and Wales was inextricably linkedMET with work undertakenNONMET with offenders in trouble through drink .
Almost a century later the new approach to punishment in the community outlinedMET by the White Paper once again presentsMET alcohol misuse as a key problem requiringNONMET community-based intervention .
‘ Alcohol ’ , the White Paper states , ‘ is implicatedNONMET in a wide variety of crimes , drunken driving , offences of public disorder and domestic violence ’ ( p. 21 , para. 4. 14 ) .
In describingMET its vision of effective supervision the White Paper goesMET on to noteMET : offenders takeMET part in alcohol education programmes so that they can learnNONMET to drinkNONMET sensibly .
They learnNONMET about the relative strength of different drinks , the amount which is safe to consumeNONMET , and the pitfalls to avoidNONMET ( e.g. competitive drinking and buyingNONMET ‘ rounds ’ ) ( p. 37 , para. 7.11 ) .
As a summary of alcohol education programmes , this is something of a simplification .
However it does provideMET a useful introduction to the origins of the Alcohol Education Course reported here .
Furthermore , it highlightsMET the suitability of referringNONMET to this type of project for testingMET out the appropriateness of applyingMET the notion of punishment to probation practice .
In 1985 the management of Somerset Probation Service was facedMET with the fact that nearly one in three of the offenders supervised in their area were either knownNONMET to be or suspected of misusing alcohol ( Singer , 1985 ) .
Aware of practitioners ' frustration in not being able to workNONMET effectively with these problematic clients , Probation management , in partnership with the voluntary sector , determined to developNONMET an Alcohol Education Course ( AEC ) .
By 1986 , when social inquiry report monitoring information coveringMET 1,257 offenders indicated that the problem of drink-related offending was virtually as great for pre- as for post-sentence clients , that is , alcohol was citedNONMET as a pre-offence problem in twenty-nine per cent of cases , a specialist project worker had been appointedNONMET .
Towards the end of 1986 an AEC was launchedMET and has been runningMET ever since .
The aim of the course is to educateNONMET offenders about alcohol to facilitateNONMET a lasting change in their subsequent use of this drug .
This aim is underpinnedMET by three interrelated objectives and it is not without significance how they complementNONMET and serveMET to implementNONMET the White Paper's own trinity of ‘ aims of supervision ’ , that is , protection of the public , prevention of reoffending and successful reintegration of the offender in the community ( p. 35 , para. 7.3 ) .
These were : 1 .
To increaseMET knowledge about alcohol so that future alcohol use can be more informed and therefore more prudent .
2 .
To instilNONMET or reinforceMET responsible drinking attitudes and behaviour .
3 .
To encourageMET the maintenance of , or , where appropriate , a reduction to a personally and socially safe level of alcohol unit intake .
To meetMET these objectives the AEC has a structured programme involvingNONMET group and individual contact , that is , six group sessions sandwichedMET between one-to-one interviews held immediately before and after the group con act contact .
The initial one-to-one meeting , held with one of the two group leaders , servesMET to clarifyNONMET what participants can expectNONMET from the course and what is expected of them .
A standard contract which coversMET conditions of attendance and an agreement to completeNONMET various assignments between group sessions is signedNONMET by each participant .
The final interview entailsMET a personalized review of the course , as well as the formulation of a follow-up plan to be undertakenNONMET with the offender's supervising officer .
The course employsMET a variety of materials and techniques including the use of checklists , magazine and newspaper clippings , quizzes , videos , brainstorm exercises , discussions , drink diaries , and role plays ( Menary , 1986 ) .
The AEC is primarily intendedNONMET for young adults subject to a probation order with a special condition of attendance ( Schedule 11 4A(II) Criminal Justice Act 1982 ) and reflectsMET the fact that most Somerset offenders in trouble through drink commitMET serious offences and/or possessNONMET a substantial number of previous convictions .
In short , they are seriously at risk of committingMET further offences and becomingNONMET trappedNONMET in the revolving door of custody .
The development of the Somerset AEC both accords with and constitutesNONMET a practical example of the Home Office's recent guidance to sentencers : In recent years the probation service has devotedNONMET increasing resources to supervisingMET the more serious and persistent offenders .
Probation orders which are combinedMET with constructive , disciplined and effective programmes of supervision are increasingly being usedNONMET for offenders who standMET to receiveNONMET custodial sentences ( 1990b , p. 35 ) .
From the description of the AEC already givenMET the demanding and disciplined nature of the course can be appreciatedNONMET .
However , the course is not punitive ; it is not concerned with the infliction of pain .
Instead , it is concerned with the establishment of rules .
This is plainly evident from the section of the contract signedNONMET by each participant where what is expected of them is speltMET out : You will be expectedNONMET to keepNONMET a drink diary throughout the course , and makeMET attempts at reducingNONMET the amount you drinkNONMET if it is greater than accepted healthy drinking levels .
You must be willing to be helpedNONMET and help others — your experiences will be useful to other group members .
You must attendNONMET 8 sessions ( these will consistNONMET of : an introductory session , six group sessions and a final assessment interview ) .
You must not drinkNONMET before the session .
You must be on time — lateness will countMET as an absence .
Unlike the prison inmate , AEC participants can not sitMET back and passively do their time .
Probation practice is not , however , solely concerned with the establishment of rules .
As has been demonstratedNONMET elsewhere with regard to the generic probation setting ( Singer , 1989 ) , the supervision of offenders involvesNONMET two overarching aims : namely support and surveillance .
Support refersNONMET to anything which is saidNONMET or done to helpNONMET the offender solveNONMET or mitigateNONMET their personal or social problems : surveillance to anything which is saidNONMET or done to induceNONMET the offender to conformNONMET to socially acceptable standards of behaviour .
These aims are implementedNONMET through the practice of four distinguishable but related methods .
In terms of support , there is counselling and assistingNONMET : in terms of surveillance , there is directingNONMET and monitoring .
Each of these four methods are employedMET during the eight sessions .
Although summarizedNONMET as an alcohol education course , the sessions are not just concerned with givingMET information but also with enabling participants to makeMET practical use of it .
In the first group session the counselling method is registeredNONMET in the course tutor's notes ( Menary , 1986 ) by the explanation : ‘ This session aimsMET to getMET participants to considerNONMET the subject of alcohol in ways they had not thoughtNONMET of in the past ’ ( p. 3 ) .
During this session the importance of monitoring is also emphasizedMET : Drinks exercises introduceMET the notion of measurement , concentration of alcohol content ; information which will be necessary to carryNONMET out the recording of alcohol consumption throughout the duration of the course ( p. 3 ) .
In the fifth group session entitledNONMET ‘ Focus on the Individual ’ , the counselling and the monitoring combine with the directing and assisting methods .
At the start of the session the tutor's notes makeMET clear that directing extendsMET beyond enforcingNONMET the conditions of attendance : This session allowsMET for an in depth examination of the drinking diaries over the last five weeks — identifyingNONMET the risky circumstances or situations … .
The aim at the end of the session is to encourageNONMET participants to makeMET rules for their future drinking which will leadMET to a lessening of identified problems ( p. 4 ) .
Similarly , the assisting extendsMET beyond simply providingNONMET handouts of useful information : It is important that participants are providedNONMET with the skills to reduceMET their drinking levels or handle more effectively ‘ pub centredNONMET ’ problems .
The use of role play , incorporatingNONMET previously discussed difficulties ( i.e. homework assignment session 4 ) in ‘ real ’ or setMET up situations providesNONMET an opportunity for testingNONMET these skills .
Probably the best illustration of the assisting method in action during the course comesMET in the fifth session when Somerset practitioners takeMET the logic of workingNONMET with the problem in the community to its ultimate conclusion .
In the second half of the session , course leaders sponsor participants to an evening at the pub for the purpose of practising drinking skills and purchasing non-alcoholic drinks .
The counselling , assistingNONMET , directingNONMET , and monitoring on the AEC giveMET substance to the aims of support and surveillance and provideNONMET the basis for establishingNONMET a model of probation practice .
Punishment has no place in this model .
Instead the AEC can best be understoodNONMET as an example of a non-punitive paradigm of probation practice .
Twenty years ago the Advisory Council on the Penal System observedMET that notions of punitiveness do not accordNONMET with ‘ the British concept of probation as an alternative to , rather than a suspension of , punishment ’ ( quotedNONMET in Bochel , 1976 , p. 238 ) .
Twenty years later the AEC demonstratesMET that this remainsNONMET no less true now than it was then .
But does the AEC workMET ?
BRINGINGMET FOSSILS BACK TO LIFE In this chapter some of the ways in which palaeontologists determineNONMET the way fossil animals livedNONMET are describedNONMET , reanimatingMET the dead fragments to buildMET up a living creature .
Since popular ideas of life in the past are often foundedMET on vividly coloured reconstructions of ‘ The World in the Jurassic Period ’ and the like , it is important to rememberNONMET that these imaginative scenes are all inferences from bones , and similar fragments .
In fact there is nothing fixedMET about such interpretations , because the way the fossils are understoodNONMET may changeMET over the years , but it is usually some time before new discoveries percolateMET into the popular presentations .
Even the most solid-looking dinosaurs may have changedMET their habits in the last few years !
Many different lines of evidence may be used to flesh out the bare bones of the fossils .
The first of these is the evidence of the rocks from which the remains were recoveredNONMET .
The sediments themselves revealMET much about the environment of deposition , as was shownMET in Chapter 3 .
It is important to establishNONMET whether the fossil animal actually livedNONMET in the environment which furnishedMET its sedimentary cover , or whether its remains were sweptMET in from some other place .
Fortunately it is usually easy to spotNONMET such intruders .
The type of sediment and the associated fossils will showMET whether the environment was marine , freshwater or terrestrial , providingNONMET the basic information into which the ecology of the animal has to be accommodatedMET .
The sediments themselves may have preservedMET some of the tracks leftNONMET by the animal ( p. 20 ) to giveMET direct evidence of its past activities .
From the tracks alone it is possible to be certain of the bipedal stance of certain dinosaurs , and to measureNONMET their stride .
The character of the rocks , and their setting in the past geography at the time when they accumulatedNONMET , diagnosesMET the climatic setting in which the extinct fauna livedNONMET , and climate imposesMET certain restraints on possible modes of life .
Savannah animals differNONMET from those of tropical rain forests , and these again from inhabitants of the tundra at high latitudes .
LookingNONMET at the fossil animal itself , the first necessity is to reconstructNONMET it as accurately as possible from its fragmentary remains .
Sometimes this is a very complex business , particularly for vertebrates with numbers of small bones .
To proceedMET from the reconstruction to an assessment of probable life habits two different but complementary approaches are used .
One method attempts to compareNONMET the structures of teeth or limbs or some other feature of the extinct animal with living analogues .
These do not have to be biologically related organisms .
The basic argument is that structuresNONMET that are closely similar were probably adaptedNONMET to a similar function .
Sometimes these similarities are quite obvious : the ferocious teeth of a predatory dinosaur are a sure indication of hunting habits , with hardly a glance at the fangs of living mammalian carnivores .
But the structure and functioning of grinding or chewing teeth in other mammals , in which opposing teeth co-operateMET in action , and which can be matchedNONMET in extinct , unrelated mammals , is a much more subtle matter , involvingNONMET detailed studies on the operation of living dental systems to helpNONMET elucidateNONMET the functioning of fossil ones .
The technique of ‘ hunt the analogue ’ is a favourite one practised by palaeontologists , but it is certainly not a foolproof one , because there are many fossil animals that defyMET comparison with living organisms , and some analogues do not standMET up to detailed scrutiny .
The second method triesMET to analyseNONMET the structure of the fossil almost as if it were a piece of engineering .
If the fossil is constructedNONMET in a certain way , then there are only a limited number of ‘ jobs ’ that the structure could performMET .
The idea here is to decideNONMET which of the possibilities is the most likely one .
This assumesMET that nature only manufacturesMET efficient designs .
For the most part this is a reasonable assumption to makeMET .
Most animals today do seemNONMET to have bodies that accord well with the functions they have to carry out to surviveNONMET : flyers are aerodynamically efficient , active swimmers have suitable streamlining , herbivorous mammals have teeth appropriateNONMET for grinding plant food , and so on .
Ideally one could constructNONMET a model of the fossil to test out these various functions in experiments , but the number of examples where the analysis has been pursuedMET this far are limited .
Of course it can never be knownNONMET whether the right answer has been reachedMET ( unless somebody dredges up a ‘ living fossil ’ from the depths of the ocean ) — there are only varying degrees of probability .
But the best answers are probably obtainedMET where the functional design of the fossil points to the same life habits as a living analogue , and where both are consistent with the geological circumstances in which the fossil remains occurNONMET .
SWIMMING TRILOBITES There are thousands of different kinds of trilobites .
All of them were marine and all of them are extinct .
Since many kinds of trilobites co-existedNONMET at any one time they were probably occupying different ecological niches , >behavingNONMET in different ways , correspondingNONMET with the wide variation in shape that they showMET .
We can useNONMET the methods describedNONMET above to elucidateNONMET some of these occupations , and getMET a glimpse , albeit an imperfect one , of the trilobite as it livedNONMET .
I will takeMET an example where all the methods can be usedNONMET , and where all point in the same direction , so that the answer is probably correct .
Most trilobites were broadly oval-shaped being rather longer than wide , not greatly convex , and with eyes that occupyMET perhaps a quarter of the length of the head .
There are a few trilobite species , however , with enormous , globular eyes ( seeNONMET below ) .
By examiningNONMET the way these animals were putMET together it is possible to suggestNONMET a likely mode of life .
Giant-eyed Ordovician trilobite , seenNONMET from the top and side .
Twice its natural size .
Enlargement showsMET a section through the lenses to showMET the direction of the field of view .
We can takeMET the eyes first .
The trilobite eye was of a compound type , and each lens was madeMET up of a calcite crystal .
From the optical properties of this mineral we knowNONMET that the lens was able to interpretMET light coming from a direction more or less at right-angles to the lens surface .
So we can deduceNONMET what the field of vision of our globular-eyed trilobite was , by lookingNONMET at the directions in which all the lenses face .
It turnsMET out that our animal was able to seeNONMET in almost every direction — upwards , downwards , sideways and forwards , and even backwards , because the eyes bulgedNONMET out beyond the line of the rest of the body .
Most other trilobites have a predominantly lateral field of view .
If the animal lived on the sea bottom , it seemsNONMET unlikely that it would have eye lenses specialized for lookingNONMET downwards , and we beginNONMET to suspectMET that the animal habitually dweltNONMET above the sea floor .
Other features of its shape are consistent with this .
At the – edge of the eyes are a pair of long spines , and these point downwards at a steep angle , at very awkward attitude for restingNONMET comfortably on the sea floor .
Most ‘ normal ’ trilobites have a more or less horizontal rim around the forward margin , which may have restedNONMET on the sediment surface .
The thorax of the large-eyed trilobite is remarkably long comparedNONMET with the average trilobite ( compareNONMET Fig. 33 ) .
The convex , middle part of the thorax containedNONMET the musculature that operatedMET the appendages ( which , as usual , are not preservedNONMET ) , and the relatively large volume of this region showsMET that the musculature was powerful .
The construction of this giant-eyed trilobite suggestsMET that it livedNONMET an actively swimmingNONMET life well above the bottom , and possibly in the surface waters of the sea .
Of course because there are no living trilobites we can not findMET direct confirmation of this hypothesis , but we can lookMET for other arthropods that have the same modifications of the eyes , for example , in the present day oceans .
The analogy is foundMET in such ocean-going amphipods ( a kind of ‘ shrimp ’ ) as Cystosoma , which also has enormously expandedNONMET eyes , lookingNONMET like headlamps , comparedNONMET with its bottom-dwelling relatives ( seeNONMET above ) .
In fact many of the arthropods that inhabitNONMET the water column have large , globular eyes of this kind .
49 Fossil bony fish , Lates gracilis , Eocene .
This fish is preservedNONMET in a fine-grained limestone which preservedMET most of the skeletal details of the fish ( but not its colours ) .
This is a stout-bodied fish , something like a perch in general proportions , with long , low fins on upper and lower rear of the body ( fin rays finely divideNONMET near their ends ) .
Head to tailNONMET the fish measures 17 cm .
50 Vertebra of the Jurassic pliosaur , Liopleurodon species , Kimmeridge , southern England .
This is only one vertebra of an animal much too bulky to appearNONMET in a book of this size !
The original porous bone has been consolidatedNONMET to becomeNONMET much heavier than it would have been in life .
Diameter of the vertebra is about 10 cm .
51 Fossil frog , Rana species , Miocene , Spain .
This species is preservedNONMET in a soft shale , but one which allowsMET for the skeletal anatomy to be preservedNONMET in its entirety .
The outline of the soft parts are also clearly displayedNONMET , so that the animal has been preservedNONMET almost in frozen motion .
Frogs are one of the more numerous of amphibian fossils .
Specimen 12 cm long .
52 Fossil calcareous alga , belongingMET to the genus Coelosphaeridium , Ordovician , Ringsaker , Norway .
These spherical algae are preservedNONMET as internal moulds in a mudstone , the original calcite having disappearedNONMET .
Canals within the algae stand out as rods in this kind of preservation , which is common in Ordovician rocks .
There is a central sphere visible on one of the specimens .
Related forms are spreadMET over much of the world in Ordovician and Silurian times .
Individual globes have a diameter of 1½–2 cm .
53 Fossil lycopod bark , Lepidodendron rimosum , Carboniferous , Newcastle , England .
This is a typical ‘ coal shale ’ ; shales and silts occurringNONMET between productive coal seams often containNONMET impressions of the plants that wentMET to formNONMET the coal .
The plant material itself is convertedNONMET to black carbon .
This fossil bark is typifiedNONMET by its lozenge-shaped leaf scars arrangedNONMET in spiral rows .
This fragment is 1O cm long .
54 Fossil bark of the lycopod tree , Sigillaria laevigata , Carboniferous .
This specimen lies on a slab of mudstone , the specimen itself having been convertedNONMET into coal-like material — that is , into carbon .
Sigillaria bark is coveredMET with little horseshoe-shaped scars ( leaf cushions ) .
It is foundNONMET in North America ( Canada and the US ) , England , Belgium , France , Germany and Russia .
This piece is 9 cm long .
55 Leaves of the enigmatic plant , Glossopteris linearis , Permian .
Many of these long leaves are preservedNONMET on the bedding planes of a siltstone .
Glossopteris is characterizedNONMET by its long strap-shaped leaves , which have a conspicuous midrib , with many fine , smaller veins branching off it to formMET a network .
Its classification in relation to other plants is still unsolved .
These leaves have a length of 7–8 cm .
56 Fossil root , Stigmaria ficoides , Carboniferous .
This root is preservedNONMET as an internal mould , in a tough sandstone .
It has been slightly crushedNONMET .
The infilling sandstone is derivedNONMET from the fossil soil over which the root was growing .
Stigmaria is the name givenMET to roots of the giant lycopod Lepidodendron ( this page ) .
This specimen is 15 cm long , but roots have been foundNONMET which attainMET a length of 14 metres !
57 Leaf of a Carboniferous seedfern , Mariopteris muricata , Staffordshire , England .
The specimen is preservedNONMET in a hard claystone nodule , which preservedMET the leaflets in relief .
This is quite a common preservation in coal measures .
Microscopical details are not so well-preserved , and the fossil is , of course , only a fragment of a larger plant .
The leaflets are attachedNONMET to the axis along their entire base .
6 cm long .
58 Fossil horsetail , Annularia sphenophylloides , Carboniferous .
This specimen is preservedNONMET as a carbonaceous compression on a very fine-grained and well-bedded sandstone , a preservation common in Carboniferous rocks .
The little circlets of flat ‘ leaves ’ bornNONMET at regular intervals on the jointedMET stems serveMET to distinguishNONMET this plant from others in the Carboniferous coal-shales. 8 cm long .
59 A ‘ prefern ’ , Archaeopteris hibernica , Devonian , Kilkenny , Ireland .
A fern-like plant , beautifully preservedNONMET in a yellow sandstone .
The original material of the axis shows up black against the background of the rock .
The large frond carriesMET many branches , on which there are numbers of leaf-like pinnules — more or less alternating on either side of the branch .
The specimen is 25 cm long .
60 Fossil fern , Sphenopteris laurenti , Carboniferous , Derbyshire , England .
The frond of this fossil fern is preservedNONMET as a compression on the surface of a fine-grained , mica-rich siltstone .
Some of the original fine detail on the leaflets is preservedNONMET .
Reproductive structures should really be foundNONMET to distinguishNONMET it from other , superficially fern-like plants .
This frond is 9 cm long .
61 Fossil poplar leaf , Populus latior , Miocene .
The leaf is excellently preservedNONMET on the flat bedding-plane of a limestone laid down under fresh water .
Poplar leaves have an elegant outline resembling that of an arab minaret .
This species has a finely toothed margin ; a large , wide leaf bornNONMET on a long stem .
This type of tree has a history extendingMET back to the upper Cretaceous .
Length of leaf is 18 cm .
62 Miocene maple seeds , Acer trilobatum .
Seeds of the maple family are typically in pairs , joined at the base , with flat ‘ wings ’ that helpMET the seeds to disperseNONMET .
Seeds of Acer are rare comparedNONMET with the leaves , which can be foundNONMET in rocks dating back to the Cretaceous period .
This is from the Oeningen , Switzerland .
Seeds are about 3 cm long .
63 Miocene maple leaf , Acer trilobatum .
This leaf is exquisitely preservedNONMET in a fine-grained , flat-bedded marly limestone .
Although much of the fine detail can be seenNONMET most of the tissue of the leaf is destroyedNONMET .
The leaf is dividedNONMET into three parts with a broad central lobe ( finely toothed ) and two flanking lobes .
Simple , distinct veining can also be seenNONMET .
The leaf is 10 cm long .
64 Fossil flower , Porana oeningensis , Miocene .
These beautifully preserved flowers are from the Oeningen deposits like the maple leaf and seeds illustrated here .
Fossil flowers are extremely rare because of their delicacy and because they are shortlived .
These flowers have five oval petals , finely veined .
No details of the stamens are present in the fossil state .
Diameter of the flowers is about 2 cm .
Giant-eyed living crustacean ( Cystosoma ) If it is correct that our trilobite lived above the sea bottom , actively swimmingNONMET in the water , there are certain predictions we can makeMET about its geological occurrence which can be testedNONMET by lookingNONMET in the rocks .
Most bottom-dwelling trilobites preferred to liveNONMET at a particular water depth , or on a particular type of sea bottom ( mud , sand or lime ) .
No such restriction should applyNONMET to our large-eyed species ; it should be foundMET with all other different kinds of trilobite assemblages without preference .
This has been provedNONMET in several places : in some arctic localities it is foundMET with trilobites that livedNONMET at great depths in the muds of the Ordovician ocean , while in Canada the same species occursNONMET mixed with the inhabitants of the shallow-water seas , where limestones were accumulatingNONMET .
By the same token the free-swimming trilobite may be expectedNONMET to have a very wide geographical distribution , for oceans would be no barrier to it .
And again this provesNONMET to be the case : our example is foundNONMET in Arctic Canada , in the high Arctic island of Spitsbergen , thousands of miles away in what is now the desert country of Nevada and Utah in the United States , in western Ireland , in Russia , and in northwestern Australia .
So in this case the different sources of evidence all point in the same direction , whether derivedNONMET from a detailed consideration of the way the trilobite is constructedMET , or by analogy with living animals with similar adaptations , or from the evidence of the rocks or the distribution of the fossils .
These giant-eyed trilobites of the Ordovician were active swimmers in the surface waters , as near certainly as we can ever knowNONMET .
There are all kinds of different questions we can askNONMET about the life habits of these trilobites , which are not subject to the same kind of careful scrutiny .
What did they eatNONMET , for example ?
Because we do not have the legs preservedNONMET , it is not possible to seeNONMET how the mouth appendages functionedNONMET in feedingNONMET , and neither are the stomach contents preservedNONMET .
So here there are only more or less likely speculations .
Active swimmers in the surface waters of the present oceans are likely to feedNONMET directly on the plankton , and the trilobites may have had a method of harvestingMET large quantities of minute food .
Or they may have been hunters after larger prey , in which case when appendages are eventually discoveredNONMET they may proveNONMET to have adaptations for grasping and manipulatingNONMET larger food .
Puzzles remainMET , even though we can be certain of the rudiments of the story .
CONTROVERSY AMONG THE GIANT DINOSAURS The giant sauropod dinosaurs like Brachiosaurus were the largest land animals the world has seenMET they weighedNONMET more than 80 tonnes and present quite different problems in the interpretation of their life habits from the diminutive trilobites .
Such spectacular animals have obviously attractedMET much attention , and one might supposeNONMET that the problem of how they livedNONMET would have been satisfactorily solvedNONMET long ago .
Most of the popular books showingMET the Mesozoic giants in their natural setting portrayNONMET them wallowingNONMET about in swamps flankedNONMET by deep vegetation , their bodies largely under water .
Surely an animal of this bulk , it was arguedNONMET , must be partly supportedNONMET by water , and their relatively inconsequential teeth must have been adaptedNONMET for chewingNONMET on the kind of soft , luxuriant vegetation that flourishesNONMET in and around swamps .
Because their nasal openings were on the top of their heads they could even continueNONMET to breatheNONMET if it becameNONMET necessary ( seeNONMET p. 115 ) to totally submergeNONMET .
Recently the life habits of the giants have been lookedMET at in a way that disprovesMET most of these traditional notions .
ConsiderNONMET the structure of their legs .
The sauropods have relatively long , pillar- like legs , resemblingNONMET those of the elephant , the largest living land animal , and may have been well adaptedNONMET for supportingNONMET the huge bulk of the animal .
The feet of the sauropod are small ( relatively speaking !
) , with short , stubby toes , yet animals that walk on soft mud tendMET to have spreading feet to distributeNONMET their weight more evenly .
It is difficult to seeMET how the compact feet of the sauropod could avoidMET becomingNONMET stuck fast in the soft , muddy bottom of a lake .
If the dinosaur did , after all , liveNONMET on dry land , then the long neck could have usefully functionedNONMET to allowMET the animal to browseNONMET the high foliage of trees ( seeNONMET p. 116 ) .
It has been suggestedNONMET that an animal of the size of Brachiosaurus could not have breathedNONMET under water because of the pressure on the lungs .
Their fossil remains seemNONMET to occurNONMET with other animals and plants , which are generally acceptedNONMET as terrestrial .
There is even some evidence from the tracks they have leftNONMET behind that Diplodocus and its allies moved about in herds .
They may have been the gigantic reptilian analogue of the elephant , and it may be no coincidence that the elephant also has its nasal openings on top of the skull , with the nostrils in this case sitedMET at the end of the trunk it has been suggestedNONMET that some sauropods may have had a proboscis of some sort .
The balance of evidence seemsNONMET to be swinging away from the original idea of swamp-dwelling giant dinosaurs to fully terrestrial habits .
But other aspects of the dinosaur living habits are still more strongly debatedNONMET .
In the last few years a powerful controversy has arisenMET over whether the dinosaurs as a whole were cold-blooded , like all living reptiles ( and there is no doubt that dinosaurs were reptiles ) , or warm-blooded , resemblingNONMET mammals in this respect .
Cold-blooded animals have to ‘ warmMET up ’ before they can be fully active ; that is why lizards and snakes baskNONMET in the sun in temperate climates .
For this reason they can not copeMET with climates having greatly extendedMET winters .
Warm-blooded animals have the same body temperatures at all times , and can be more continuously active , but they useMET far more energy — and hence needNONMET more food — than cold-blooded animals of the same size .
The posture of many dinosaurs , and particularly the carnivorous theropod dinosaurs , was fully erect with the legs beneath the body , and unlike the sprawling legs of living reptiles ( seeNONMET p. 116 ) .
The long back legs of such hunters lookNONMET highly suitable for running , and as they did so the long tail may have been heldNONMET erect as a kind of counter-balance ( seeNONMET p. 116 ) .
For any kind of prolonged activity , warm-bloodedness would have been a distinct advantage .
Under the microscope even the bone structure of these dinosaurs looksNONMET more like that of living mammals than cold-blooded reptiles .
On the other hand it can be arguedNONMET that the sauropods like Brachiosaurus were so large , and with a relatively small surface area through which to coolNONMET comparedNONMET with their enormous volume , that their cooling rate could have been slow enough to allowMET them to sustainNONMET more continuous activity than smaller , living reptiles .
It has also been arguedNONMET that the small mouths of the giants simply could not have downedNONMET enough food to supportMET a warm-blooded metabolism , particularly plant food that needsNONMET a lot of processing before it becomesNONMET available as energy .
The armoured or plated dinosaurs includeNONMET some species that seemNONMET too heavily burdenedNONMET with protective armour to have been very active , but this does not necessarily meanNONMET that they had to be cold-blooded .
Protagonists of the warm-blooded theory will showNONMET some of the horned dinosaurs chargingNONMET over the Cretaceous plains like furious reptilian rhinoceroses !
One idea about the life habits of the dinosaur giants , publishedNONMET in Joc and Colette at the Natural History Museum in 1935 The warm-blooded supporters tendMET to allyNONMET themselves with the supporters of a theory about the relationships of the dinosaurs .
This is that the dinosaurs , or a close dinosaur relative , includedNONMET the ancestors of the living birds .
Some of the smaller , and most certainly highly active dinosaurs were about the size of a chicken , and there is more than a passing similarity between a running ostrich and the kind of reconstruction that showsMET fleet-footed , running dinosaurs .
The point is that birds themselves are warm-blooded , like mammals , and if birds and dinosaurs are as closely relatedNONMET as now seemsNONMET likely , then it obviously increasesNONMET the likelihood that the dinosaurs themselves may have been warm-blooded .
The pros and cons of this theory are the subject of much contentious debate by experts , but it would probably be correct to sayMET that the greater number of specialists believeNONMET that at least the more bipedal of the dinosaurs , including small and large carnivores , were warm-blooded , active animals .
A lot of the argument among the authorities on these animals is about the equivalence or otherwise of certain bones in dinosaurs and bird skeletons ( and particularly the Jurassic bird Archaeopteryx ) ; this makesMET for rather dry reading for the layman .
But the end- product is the accurate reconstruction of the Jurassic and Cretaceous terrestrial world , over which the dinosaurs were indisputably dominant .
Action and Inaction in the Cities Susanne MacGregor and Ben Pimlott The essays in this book do not amountMET to a programme : but they are intendedNONMET to provideNONMET a springboard for  one .
The aim is to analyseNONMET a problem which economic growth alone has failedMET to cureMET — and to considerMET possible new forms of public  action .
The biggest single difficulty in drawing attention to urban poverty is that it is not new , but simply — in some of its most worrying manifestations — getting worse .
Like the poor themselves , the inner city has long been with us .
Ever since the Industrial Revolution created a mass urban society , the conditions of the poorest city dwellers have givenMET rise to anxiety among the better  off .
The inner city has been variously regardedMET as a  cause for moral outrage , a threat to public order , or as a stain on the nation's conscience .
Meanwhile bad housing , bad sanitation , lack of education , and other perennial ills associatedNONMET with overcrowding and poverty have been routinely denouncedNONMET by political leaders and social reformers .
A central objective of the post-war welfare state was , indeed , to alleviateNONMET the problems of the urban poor , over whom Beveridge's Five Giants ( WantNONMET , Disease , Ignorance , Squalor , and Idleness ) had for so long held sway .
In the early 1940s and 1950s , the belief was widely held that a combination of government intervention — in the form of town planning , housing and health programmes , and the provision of social security — and permanent male full employment , together with an increase in real wages , would reduceMET suffering due to poverty to manageable proportions .
The 1964 Labour Government was electedNONMET on a tide of impatience at the slackening pace of social reform , but also of optimism that little more than economic growth , fuelledMET by technological change , was neededNONMET to removeMET the main causes of urban deprivation ( MacGregor , 1981 ) .
DisillusionNONMET swiftly followedMET .
The work of Peter Townsend and others showedMET that , far from presidingNONMET over the elimination of poverty , the Wilson Government actually failedMET to preventMET some of its features from worsening ( Townsend and Bosanquet , 1972 ) .
Evidence beganNONMET to mountMET that much of the social welfare paternalism of the post-war period had createdNONMET almost as many problems as it solvedMET .
Neither the Butler Education Act of 1944 , nor the introduction of comprehensive schools , preventedMET a high proportion of children from under-MET .
Post-war reconstruction and housing programmes seemedNONMET to do nothing to preventMET , and seemedNONMET even to encourageMET , a rise in crime and mental illness .
Meanwhile , in many parts of the country , a problem as old as cities themselves — tension between cultural groups , between earlier immigrants and newer ones , between black , brown , and white , and ( increasingly ) between large sections of urban youth and the police — cameMET to be identifiedNONMET as the key inner-city issue .
Rising unemployment turnedMET a lingering and growing malaise into a crisis .
As in the United States , so in Britain it was an outbreak of violence that dramatically brought the plight of the inner cities to public notice .
In the early 1980s , at a time when manufacturing industry was collapsing and the outlook for the unskilled looked particularly bleak , frustration boiledMET over in a series of riots in London , Bristol , Birmingham , Liverpool , and elsewhere .
All were spontaneous outbursts : none , contrary to some claims , were politically inspired or orchestratedMET ( except in Northern Ireland where urban problems existedNONMET on a grander , more devastating scale , and where there was a unique heritage ) .
Many had an ‘ ethnic ’ dimension , in the sense that many of the rioters were black .
Unlike , however , the 1958 Notting Hill riots , few of those involvedNONMET were immigrants — the vast majority were British born .
And the disturbances could not strictly be calledNONMET racial : the most prominent feature was that of violent clashes between young people and the police .
The problems , however , were not confinedMET violent upheavals of this kind .
Paul Harrison's Inside the Inner City : Life under the Cutting Edge focused on Hackney , a London borough rankedMET among the worst  off on any scale of urban deprivation ( Harrison , 1983 ) .
Harrison describesNONMET ( p. 369 ) the way in which the inner urban powder-keg leadsMET to a vicious circle , with many victims , but few individual villains : The police force face the virtually impossible task of keepingMET the lid on the explosive mixture of ingredients that the dynamics of British society have assembledMET in the inner city .
This mixture , heatedMET by recession and high unemployment , inevitably generatesMET a high level of crime .
This necessitatesNONMET , in turn , a far more numerous and ubiquitous police presence than in other kinds of area , far more frequent unpleasant contact with the public as potential suspects , and far greater opportunities for police misjudgment or abuse .
The inevitable sufferers , of course , are the poor , of whom those who actually commitMET the offences that concern the police are a tiny minority and whom , indeed , it should be the purpose of the police to protectNONMET .
Not only are the most disadvantaged on the receiving end of most crime , arguesNONMET Harrison , they also have to putNONMET  up with the heaviest police presence .
They are more likely to be stoppedNONMET and searchedNONMET , and to be the victim of mistaken arrest or conviction .
At the same time , the residents of the poorest areas have to sufferMET , in a way that is not true of those who liveNONMET elsewhere , a growing fear of attack on themselves or their property .
Improved police methods might helpMET , writesNONMET Harrison , to containMET the problem .
But , without other changes , the result is likely to be a ‘ society of barricaded self-defence , and a steady erosion of civil liberties ’ .
And he concludesNONMET , ‘ of all the warnings that the inner city has to offerMET for the direction British society is takingMET , this is perhaps the most sinister ’ .
Harrison's vision of a nightmarish future for inner cities , locked in a cold or hot war between have-nots and the forces of public order , was echoedNONMET by Robert Chesshyre ( 1987 , p. 95 ) , who concludedNONMET that by the late 1980s : The basic social contract , whereby citizens enjoyMET certain rights — including health care , decent education and housing and a job — in return for which they observeMET the rule of law , was breakingMET down .
As a consequence an underclass was evolvingMET — football hooligans , muggers , inner city rioters — somewhat more frightening than their Dickensian forebears because they were mobile and all too visible .
Recently , of course , there has been an added dimension — part media-and-politician inflated , part real : drugs .
The spiral in drug abuse and trafficking , with direct consequences for the AIDS epidemic , has createdNONMET a new kind of alarm .
The early 1980s witnessedMET a radical change in patterns of heroin takingNONMET , alongside the global increase .
Smoking heroin ( ‘ chasingMET the dragon ’ ) was one feature of the upsurge .
Another was the increased  availability of , and demand for , cocaine .
Sensational media and police reports in 1989 seemedNONMET to suggestMET an increased use of ‘ crack ’ among young people in parts of south London , Liverpool , and Birmingham — with attendant fears that this particularly dangerous substance might becomeNONMET widespread , as it was reportedNONMET to be in parts of the United States .
for the moment , however , the pattern of drug abuse in Britain remains as varied as ever — with home -produced drugs such as amphetamines as serious a problem as those that hitMET the headlines .
It is a symptom of public anxiety about urban squalor — and , less creditably , of class and racial prejudice — that ‘ drugs ’ and ‘ inner cities ’ are automatically linkedMET in the popular consciousness ( MacGregor , 1989a ) .
Nevertheless , drug-taking and more particularly the disruptive social consequences of addiction , are especially serious in areas of city poverty ( Burr , 1989 ) .
In short , if life was always harder in the inner cities than elsewhere , and if conditions may temporarily have been alleviatedNONMET by the impact of the welfare state and rising incomes , the last decade has been widely representedMET as a period of deterioration .
Moreover , few would disputeNONMET that this apparent decline is a reality : the first words of the Prime Minister herself , after the result of the 1987 election was knownNONMET , were an acknowledgement of the challenge posed to Government by the ‘ inner cities ’ .
What has been lackingNONMET however — as well as the political will to do something — has been any shared agreement on the cause .
Can the problems of urban poverty be blamedNONMET on individual pathology ?
On feckless parents and grandparents ?
Or on the social or physical environment — the replacement of companionably unhygienic slums by soulless tower blocks with broken lifts ( Coleman et al .
, 1985 ) ?
Or would a simple injection of resources transformNONMET Kafkaesque honeycombs into happy living-spaces , with a consequent decline in inner-city ills ?
‘ A duke can liveNONMET comfortably in a castle , after all ’ , the architect Cedric Price is quotedNONMET as sayingNONMET .
‘ You and I would dieNONMET of frostbite .
Same building — just a matter of money and management ’ ( Parkin , 1989 ) .
The view that only ‘ outstanding management ’ could meetMET the problem was heldMET by the Audit Commission ( 1987 ) .
The picture paintedMET by the Commission's report on inner London is as gruesome as any ever presentedMET ( and is itself revealing of common prejudices in its choice of indicators of deprivation ) : In some London boroughs , unemployment among young men exceedsNONMET 45% ; in some places , among young blacks , it exceedsNONMET 60% .
More than one child in three is bornNONMET into a single parent family .
Half the school leavers have no O levels or their CSE equivalents .
Homelessness , housingNONMET conditions , crime are worsening year by year , as the cycle of urban deprivation becomesNONMET more established ( p. 1 ) Drawing on North American experience , the Commission concludedMET that ‘ poor management was an important contributory factor to New York's problems ’ , and sought to applyMET the same lessons here ( p. 2 ) .
The Government's post-1987 initiatives have , to some extent , reflectedMET  a diagnosis basedMET on the need for better management — though on the principle that central authorities can provideNONMET a firmer grip than local ones — but combinedMET with an anti-collectivist belief in the restorative powers of capitalism .
Leech and Amin ( 1988 , p. 14 ) summarizeNONMET this approach , not unfairly , in the following terms : the encouragement of private investment and the liberation of the market ; the containment of the forces of social discontent ; the control of the powers of the local authorities ; and the encouragement of the movement of the wealthy into the inner city thus creatingNONMET buffer areas of Tory support , accentuatingMET inequalities and injustice and ( hopefully though not necessarily ) reducingMET the potential for conflict among the urban poor .
The main thrust of the Government's policy is containedMET in the January 1988 White Paper on Regional Policy and the Enterprise Economy , in the new Employment Training programme , and especially in the March 1988 Action for Cities programme — all resting on wider reforms to local government structure and finance , and to education and housing .
The most striking feature of this package , apart from its aim actively to involveNONMET employers and entrepreneurs , is a sharp reduction in the role of local government .
Despite the contemporary tone of much of Action for Cities , the programme's heritage can be tracedMET to the early 1960s studies which providedNONMET the basis for the 1965 Milner–Holland Report on housing and the 1967 Plowden Report on education , as a result of which general improvement areas and education priority areas were establishedNONMET .
The 1970s ‘ Urban Programme ’ had a social , rather than economic , emphasis and was administeredMET by the Home Office .
It was initiatedNONMET partly in response to the furore causedNONMET by Enoch Powell's 1969 ‘ rivers of blood ’ speech , much as disturbances at the 1976 Notting Hill Carnival promptedMET further steps on the part of the  Department of the Environment — ‘ A riot makesMET a much bigger impact on government thinking ’ , as Donnison ( 1987 ) has pointedMET out , ‘ than any amount of earnest and accurate research ’ .
The Urban Programme consistedNONMET of grants and initiatives under the 1969 Local Government Grants ( Social Need ) Act , which was intendedNONMET as a flexible instrument to provideNONMET supplementary help to local authorities in the fields of housing , education , and health .
Originally , the Programme supplementedNONMET existing central and local government schemes designedMET to meetMET special needs in urban areas .
The scope was extendedMET in an ‘ enhanced ’ Urban Programme , which includedNONMET economic and environmental as well as social projects , and was specifically directedMET at the inner urban areas where the problems were most severe .
Earlier , the change of emphasis from a ‘ social ’ to an ‘ economic and environmental ’ focus had been reflectedMET in a switch of responsibility for the Programme from the Home Office to the  Department of the Environment .
The ‘ enhanced Programme resultedNONMET from the 1978 Inner Urban Areas Act , basedMET on a White Paper , publishedNONMET the previous year , on Policy for the Inner Cities ( DoE , 1977 ) , the first comprehensive policy statement on the subject to acknowledgeNONMET it as a definable and cohesive problem .
The White Paper drewMET on studies conducted earlier in the decade in Liverpool , Birmingham , and London which pointedMET to a debilitating flight of capital and skilled labour from the critical areas of deprivation .
A key aspect of the 1977 White Paper was the stress it placed on the wider effects of poverty : that it was not just those with acute needs who sufferedNONMET .
It arguedMET that in talkingNONMET about inner cities it was vital to thinkNONMET in terms not just of individuals , but of society ; that the multiple deprivations of the worst hit areas affectedNONMET all the residents ; that the consequences includedNONMET a pervasive sense of neglect and decay , a decline in community spirit , a low standard of neighbourhood facilities , and an increase in crime and vandalism ; and that , without government intervention , the future was one of reduced job opportunities , deteriorating housing , and a decline in public services .
The document , and the legislation that derived from it , pointed to a positively discriminatory approach : with both central and local government supplementingNONMET existing programmes in such a way as to strengthenMET local economies , as well as the physical and social environment .
Such measures constitutedMET the present Government's heritage , when it tookMET office in 1979 .
None of them , of course , anticipatedNONMET the scale of the problems which were causedNONMET by the slump and collapse of much of what remainedMET of inner urban manufacturing industry in the early 1980s .
Neither , at first , did the incoming administration foreseeMET the impact of rising unemployment , which was to be especially serious among the urban young .
True , the new Secretary of State for the Environment laid stress , from the outset , on the need for economic regeneration , and indicatedMET his sympathy for the voluntary in the tackling of urban problems .
The previous Government , however , had already pointedMET to the need to revitalizeMET urban economies , and at first the shift was more rhetorical than real .
Michael Heseltine ( 1987 , p. 138 ) has since claimedNONMET that ‘ we setMET a new objective : to makeNONMET the inner cities places where people would wantNONMET to liveNONMET and workNONMET and where the private investor would be willing to putMET his money ’ .
Partnership becameNONMET his slogan — the partnership of public and private brains and money .
A new Urban Development Grant was devisedNONMET , to pump-prime with public funds schemes which would then attractMET private investment .
Heseltine's vision was of ‘ partnerships which recogniseMET that there are some things that only governments can payMET for , but also that the ingenuity and flexibility of the private sector is indispensable ’ ( p. 156 ) .
He claimsNONMET that serious work on inner-city policy beganNONMET in 1979 : but it was , undoubtedly , the riots of 1981 , coincidingNONMET with the biggest drop in employment and job vacancies since the war , which gaveMET impetus to the new approach .
Urban Development Corporations were introducedNONMET in 1981 in London Docklands and Merseyside , and the Urban Development Grant cameMET in late the following year .
Conservative instincts were , of course , to minimizeMET — within the ‘ partnership — state involvement and expenditure , relative to that of private enterprise .
Yet , the irony of the early 1980s — as a deteriorating , but perennial , urban problem rapidly became the most acute aspect of the crisis of mass unemployment — was that a Tory government , willy-nilly , foundMET itself presidingNONMET over an increase in state intervention through a variety of agencies .
The increased scale of operations also ushered in another fashion of the 1980s — new management structures .
Thus in 1985 City  Action> Teams were introducedNONMET to each ‘ Inner City Partnership ’ area to co-ordinateMET the work of the three government  departments involved .
Task forces , meanwhile , were directedMET to tackleMET youth unemployment .
By 1986/7 the Urban Programme was supporting 1,380 starter units and 400 business startsNONMET in enterprise workshops .
It was providingNONMET 27,500 training places ( often in conjunction with the Manpower Services Commission ) : some 2,500 buildings were being improvedNONMET ; estate action aimed to tackleMET run down housing ; and a large number of new ‘ partnerships ’ ( which some might seeMET as subsidies , or discredited regional grants , in a new guise ) were in operation , in an effort to bringMET private investment to run-down urban areas .
By 1988 it was claimedNONMET that £200 million of Urban Development Grant and Urban Regeneration Grant had successfully ‘ levered ’ more than £800 million of private investment into the inner cities ( although how much of the latter sum might have been investedNONMET in any case is difficult to sayMET ) .
Meanwhile , there were other incentive schemes — Enterprise Zones , for example , and simplified Planning Zones , which aimedMET to liftMET tax and planning ‘ barriers ’ in order to facilitateNONMET investment .
Indeed , while with one hand tryingNONMET to holdMET down expenditure by local authorities , the Government foundMET itself by the late 1980s involved with the other hand in massive ear-marked spending on inner urban areas .
The Department of the Environment alone by 1988 was spendingMET half a billion pounds out of an Action for Cities total , involvingNONMET most Home departments , estimated at £3 billion .
Perhaps a Labour government would have spentMET even more : it would certainly have spentMET it in different ways .
It is a curious comment on Thatcherism , however , that the administration most committedMET to a reduction in the role of the state , and in the need for an independent private sector , has spentMET more on specific urban regeneration and employment schemes and incentives to private investment in urban areas than any other in recent history .
One of the most bizarre aspects of government policy has been the effective murder of the voluntary sector , and its appropriation , by subterfuge , into the Tory version of the corporate state .
Conservatives have always laudedNONMET the ‘ voluntarist ’ principle in welfare , and encouragedMET it from platforms .
FacedMET , however , with the catastrophic increase in unemployment and the need to occupyMET large numbers of workless people without directly employingNONMET them ( which would have runMET counter to the economic doctrine which had ledMET to the redundancy of many of them in the first place ) , the Government poured money into any ‘ voluntary ’ agency willing to putMET in a bid for government-funded cheap labour .
One result was the triumphant expansion of some charitable organizations , which rejoicedMET both at their new-found importance and at the Government's munificence .
Another was the transformation of many such bodies , already heavily subsidized from public funds , into de facto agencies of the state , which financedMET them and indirectly determinedMET their policy .
Nowhere was the impact of this clumsy sleight of hand more evident than in the inner cities , where voluntary organizations had been most active , and where the Government was most anxious for them to mopMET up unemployment .
However , the later withdrawal of government support , with the scrapping of the Community Programme as unemployment recededMET , leftMET many of these voluntary organizations high and dry .
The National Council for Voluntary Organizations ( NCVO ) has suggestedMET from a recent survey that around 3,000 projects had been affectedNONMET and had lostMET £285 million in funding ( MacGregor , 1990 ) .
There was , of course , a crucial element in the Government's anxiety : the high concentration of ethnic minorities in the areas of concern .
In 1981 nearly 40 per cent of ethnic minorities in the UK livedNONMET in ‘ partnership ’ or ‘ programme ’ areas .
There is a danger in readingNONMET back from this figure another stereotype , similar to the Pavlovian ‘ drug addiction/inner city ’ assumed link .
Some urban areas have serious problems without a major ethnic dimension ( Newcastle , Teesside ) ; not all members of ethnic minorities are poor or deprived .
Nevertheless , the high proportion of inner urban populations composedNONMET of people from ethnic minorities , and the high incidence among these groups of all the indices of poverty and social and environmental hardship — combinedNONMET with the specific problem of inter-racial rivalry , harassment , and tension — makeNONMET race and ethnicity an aspect that is central to any analysis of the inner cities and of any ameliorative approach .
MAKINGMET SENSE OF THE 1981 RIOTS Reactions to the riots have concentratedMET on a number of key variables that are saidNONMET to characterizeNONMET the localities in which the riots have occurredNONMET .
Lord Scarman's report on the 1981 disorders highlightedMET the importance of unemployment , urban deprivation , racial disadvantage , relations between young blacks and the police , the decline of civic consent , and political exclusion as the key issues .
Other reactions have concentratedMET on the issue of the interplay between inner-city decay and racial disadvantage in contemporary Britain .
Yet others have arguedNONMET that the unrest can be seenMET as a symptom of the breakdown of law and order in British society ( Gaffney , 1987 ; Hall , 1987 ; Keith , 1987 ) .
The main issues that were prominent in debates during 1980–1 were ‘ race ’ and ‘ law and order ’ .
This was by no means an accident , since throughout the 1970s a powerful body of media , political , and academic opinion had been constructedMET around the theme of how Britain was driftingMET into a ‘ violent society ’ , and how the basis of consent was being shiftedMET by the pressures of immigration and the growth of multi-racial inner city areas .
A glimpse of the impact of the 1980–1 riots at this level can be achievedNONMET through two important debates in Parliament .
The first tookMET place in the midst of the July 1981 riots , and had as its theme : ‘ Civil Disturbances ’ .
The tone of the debate was setMET by Home Secretary William Whitelaw's introductory statement in which he spokeNONMET of ( a ) the need to ‘ removeMET the scourge of criminal violence from our streets ’ , and ( b ) the urgency of developing ‘ policies designedMET to promoteMET the mutual tolerance and understanding upon which the whole future of a free democratic society dependsNONMET ’ ( Hansard , vol. 8 , 16 July 1981 : col. 1405 ) .
The ‘ scourge of criminal violence ’ was , Whitelaw arguedNONMET , a danger to the whole framework of consent and legality on which the political institutions of British society were basedMET .
In reply Roy Hattersley supportedMET the call for the immediate suppression of street violence , but warnedNONMET that the roots of such riots could not be dealtNONMET with until all people feltMET they had a stake in British society ( ibid. : cols. 1407–9 ) The second debate tookMET place on 26 November 1981 , on the publication of the Scarman Report , and had as its theme : ‘ Law and Order ’ .
The importance of the riots in pushingMET the law and order issue , and specifically policingNONMET , on to the main political agenda was emphasizedMET by the Liberal leader , David Steel , who arguedNONMET that ‘ urgent action ’ to preventNONMET a drift into lawlessness was necessary from both a moral and a political perspective ( Hansard , vol. 13 , 26 November 1981 : cols. 1009–11 ) .
A subsequent debate on the same issue in March 1982 was also full of references to the experience of 1981 , the impact of street violence , crime , decaying urban conditions , the breakdown of consent between the police and many local communities , and the spectre of ‘ more violence to comeNONMET ’ if changes in both policingNONMET tactics and social policy were not swiftly introducedNONMET ( Hansard , vol. 20 , 25 March 1982 : cols. 1107–81 ) .
The need to supportMET the police was acceptedNONMET by both the Labour and the Conservative speakers in the parliamentary debate on the riots , and was establishedNONMET as a benchmark for the official response to the riots long before the Scarman Report was publishedNONMET in November 1981 .
Any substantive disagreement centred around the issue of what role social deprivation and unemployment had in bringingMET young people to protestNONMET violently on the streets .
Intermingled with the discourses about race and law and order were constant references to unemployment , particularly among the young , and various forms of social disadvantage and poverty ( Solomos , 1988 , pp. 186–911 ) .
Throughout 1980 and 1981 debates about the riots in the media , in Parliament , and in various official reports hinged around the interrelationship between racial , law-and-order , and social factors .
The importance of this debate can be explainedNONMET , partly , by the political capital which the Opposition could makeMET from linkingMET the social and economic malaise of the country at large with violent street disturbances .
Conversely , throughout this period Government Ministers strenuously denied that unemployment and social deprivation were significant causes of urban unrest .
Although the Scarman Report is often takenMET to be the central text which arguesMET for a link between ‘ social conditions ’ and ‘ disorder ’ , the terms of the debate were by no means setMET by Scarman .
During both April and July 1981 vigorous exchanges tookMET place in the press and in Parliament about the role that deteriorating social conditions and unemployment may have playedMET in bringingNONMET about the riots .
During the 16 July parliamentary debate on ‘ Civil Disturbances ’ , Roy Hattersley's formulation of this linkage providedNONMET a useful summary of the ‘ social conditions ’ argument .
After some preliminary remarks about the Labour party's support for the police , he wentNONMET on to outlineMET his opposition to the view of the riots as essentially anti-police outbursts : I repeatNONMET that l do not believeNONMET that the principal cause of last week's riots was the conduct of the police .
It was the conditions of deprivation and despair in the decaying areas of our old cities — areas in which the Brixton and ToxtethNONMET riots tookMET place , and areas from which the skinhead invaders of Southall comeNONMET .
( Hansard , vol. 8 , 16 July 1981 : col. 1408 ) Much of the subsequent controversy about this analysis centred on the question of youth unemployment .
Hattersley had suggestedNONMET that the riots were a ‘ direct product ’ of high levels of youth unemployment , and a furious debate ensuedNONMET in both Parliament and the media about this assertion .
The final symbolic cue used to makeMET sense of the 1980–1 protests is more difficult to categorizeNONMET , but its basic meaning can be capturedMET by the term ‘ political marginality ’ .
While a number of discussions of the roots of urban unrest in the United States have notedMET the salience of political marginality in determining participation in violent protests ( Skolnick , 1969 ; Fogelson , 1971 ; Edelman , 1971 ; Knopf , 1975 ) , this issue has receivedMET relatively little attention in Britain .
Nevertheless , during the 1980–1 events and their aftermath the political context was discussedNONMET from a number of perspectives .
The Scarman Report , for example , located part of the explanation for the riots in the feelings of alienation and powerlessness which were experiencedNONMET by young blacks livingNONMET in depressed inner-city areas .
A successful policy for tacklingMET the roots of urban disorder was seenMET as one which soughtMET to involveNONMET all the community in dealingNONMET with the problems of each area so that they could comeMET to feelMET that they have a stake in its future ( Scarman , 1981 , para. 6.42 ) .
Where such arguments did not fitNONMET in with the overarching themes of race , violence and disorder , and social deprivation they were either sidelinedMET or pushed into the sub-clauses of official reports .
The Scarman Report , for example , containedMET the following policy proposal : ‘ I recommendNONMET that local communities must be fully and effectively involved in planning , in the provision of local services , and in the management and financing of specific projects , ( Scarman , 1981 , para. 8.44 ) .
Such a move towards greater political integration was seenMET by Lord Scarman as essential if the gap between inner-city residents and the forces of law and order was to be bridgedMET .
But the concern with overcomingMET political marginality remained on the sidelines of the main public debate because it questionedMET the perception of the rioters as drivenMET by irrational , uncivilized , and criminal instincts .
This did not , however , stopMET the question of political marginality and the need to reformNONMET existing policies from being raisedMET at all , as can be seenMET subsequently by the attempts after 1981 to introduceNONMET both locally and nationally measures which were meantNONMET to addressMET some of the grievances of the rioters and to ensureNONMET that further disturbances did not occurNONMET .
Aspects of these measures are consideredNONMET further on in the chapter .
PERSPECTIVES ON THE 1985 RIOTS Despite widespread predictions of further unrest in the aftermath of 1981 , the scale and the location of the 1985 riots seemNONMET to have surprised even some of the most astute commentators .
Handsworth , for example , was presentedMET even shortly before September 1985 as a ‘ success story ’ in terms of police — community relations .
The outbreak of violence in this area was therefore widely presentedMET as an aberration .
Similarly the spread of violence in London to areas such as the Broadwater Farm Estate in Tottenham was seenMET as a break from previous experience , which had centredMET on areas such as Brixton .
There are many continuities between 1980–1 and 1985 in relation to the common-sense images used in the press and television to coverMET the events .
But responses in 1985 were different , at least in terms of degree , and probably in relation to the extent to which the riots were seenMET as a ‘ race ’ phenomenon by a wider body of opinion .
The ambiguities and sub-clauses to be foundMET in much of the press coverage during 1980–1 had at least actedMET as a countervailing tendency against the more extreme forms of discourse which blamedMET the riots completely on black people .
During the 1985 riots and their immediate aftermath , the imagery of ‘ race ’ was usedMET by sections of the press without the sense of ambiguity which could still be foundMET in 1980–1 .
The ‘ silence over race ’ was breachedMET in 1980–1 , but in 1985 debate about racial issues was takenMET a step further .
Peregrine Worsthorne , for example , usedNONMET the ferocity of the confrontations in Handsworth , Brixton , and Tottenham to argueNONMET that there was a major question mark over the possibility of assimilatingNONMET the ‘ coloured population ’ into mainstream ‘ British values ’ ( Sunday Telegraph , 29 September 1985 ) .
To be sure there was still a strong response opposing Enoch Powell's call for repatriation , from all shades of political opinion , but the racialization of public debate about the 1985 riots wentMET much further than 1980–1 .
In this context it was the externality of British Afro-Caribbeans and Asians which was highlightedMET rather the racist institutions and processes which workedMET against blacks at all levels of society .
The usage of ‘ race ’ during the September-October 1985 period tookMET on new meanings , which had little if anything to do with the impact of racism as such , since the emphasis was on the cultural characteristics of the minority communities themselves .
After Handsworth part of the press response was to blameNONMET the riot on rivalry between West Indians and Asians , and even after the arguments were criticizedNONMET by local residents ; and community leaders , they were usedNONMET to ‘ explainNONMET ’ ' what happenedNONMET .
In addition , the question whether the cultures and values of the black communities , their family structures , and their political attitudes ‘ bred violence ’ was constantly raisedMET ( van Dijk , 1988 ) .
The actual facts ' of who was arrestedNONMET during the riots , whether black or white , were hardly debatedNONMET since it was assumedMET that they were mostly black and mostly unemployed and involved with crime ( Keith , 1987 ) .
The imagery of the ‘ black bomber , used in Handsworth was extendedMET to the notion that there were groups of alienated and criminalizedNONMET young blacks who sawMET the riots as a chance to engageMET in an ‘ orgy of looting ’ .
The Dear Report on Handsworth capturesMET this image and linksMET it to the social condition of young blacks : The majority of rioters who tookMET part in these unhappy events were young , black and Afro-Caribbean origin .
LetMET there be no doubt , these young criminals are not in any way representative of the vast majority of the Afro-Caribbean community whose life has contributedMET to the life and culture of the West Midlands over many years and whose hopes and aspirations are at one with those of every other law-abiding citizen .
We shareMET a common sorrow .
It is the duty of us all to ensureNONMET that an entire cultural group is not taintedMET by the actions of a criminal minority .
( Dear , 1985 , p. 69 ) This ‘ black ’ criminal minority was constructedMET not only into the leading force behind the riots , but sometimes as the only force .
Indeed , throughout September and October 1985 , and during the following months , the imagery of race continuedMET to dominateMET debate about both the causes and the policy outcomes of the riots .
As pointedMET out earlier , the ‘ social causes ’ argument was another major plank of public debate about the 1980–1 riots , particularly in relation to the highly politicized issue of unemployment .
During 1985 this issue was raisedMET once again , though by then the extent of mass unemployment and urban de-industrialization and decay was more stark than it had been in 198l .
Images of ‘ urban decay ’ , ‘ tinderbox cities ’ , and ‘ ghetto streets ’ linkedMET up with the images of ‘ race inequality ’ and ‘ black ghettos ’ to produceMET an analysis more complex but also more contradictory .
An interesting mixture of the various images was providedNONMET by a story in the Daily Telegraph under the headline : ‘ Broadwater Farm : Like the Divis Flats with Reggae ’ ( 8 October 1985 ) .
The Mirror describedMET the estate as ‘ Living Hell ’ , and quotedMET one resident as sayingNONMET that ‘ You ' ve no idea how awful daily life is ’ ( 8 October 1985 ) .
Such images were reworkings of arguments already usedNONMET about Toxteth in 1981 and Brixton in 1981 , but they were usedNONMET more widely than in 1980–1 .
Even the Daily Mail , which deployedMET the clearest use of ‘ race ’ and ‘ outside agitator ’ arguments , ranMET a major story on Broadwater Farm under the headline : ‘ Burnt-out hulks litterMET this concrete jungle … despair hangsMET heavy ’ ( 8 October 1985 ) .
A number of stories usingNONMET such imagery were runMET by both the quality and the popular press during this period , but similar arguments are to be foundMET in parliamentary debates ( Hansard , vol. 84 , 21 October 1985 , cols. 30-.46 , 388 ) , and even in official reports producedNONMET by the police on the riots in Birmingham and London .
The ‘ cities of inner despair ’ were conceivedMET as the breeding ground for disorderly protest , and however hard the Government triedNONMET to breakMET the causal link between the two , it was forcedMET to takeMET on board the need to restoreMET order not only through the police but through promises of help for the inner cities .
Much as in 1980–1 , the ‘ social causes ’ argument can not be seenMET separately from the broader debate about the future of the British economy and society .
The Government's record on unemployment was a heavily politicized issue , and just as in 1981 it vehemently deniedMET any responsibility for the riots through its pursuit of free-market policies .
But the Government did findMET a way of acceptingNONMET a link between the riots and social problems without bringingMET its main policies into the debate : namely by linkingMET the growth of violent disorder to crime and drugs .
The emphasis on ‘ crime ’ and the ‘ criminal acts ’ of the rioters in the official responses to the 1985 riots tookMET a general and a specific form .
The general form relied on the argument that the riots were not a form of protest against the insufferable social conditions of inner-city areas or the actions of the police , but a ‘ criminal act ’ or a ‘ cry for loot ’ .
This was an argument putMET most succinctly by Geoffrey Dear , Chief Constable of the West Midlands ( Dear , 1985 ) and by Douglas Hurd , the Home Secretary , in relation to Handsworth .
But it recurredNONMET as a theme in official and press responses to the other riots .
The specific form was builtMET upon the notion that the outbreak of violence in Handsworth and Brixton , in particular , was broughtNONMET about by ‘ drug barons ’ who sawMET the police attemptingNONMET to curbNONMET their activities and controlNONMET ‘ their territory ’ .
Numerous examples of this line of argument can be foundMET in Dear's report on Handsworth , and in press coverage during the riots .
TakingMET the specific argument about the role of drugs and ‘ drug barons ’ in stimulating the riots , this seemsNONMET to have servedMET two purposes .
First , it distancedMET the riots from the social , economic , political , and other grievances which had been linkedMET to them by locatingMET the cause outside the ‘ social problems ’ of inner-city dwellers and in the ‘ simple greed ’ of the drug barons to accumulateNONMET ‘ loot ’ .
Second , just as Dear's image of a few hundred ‘ young black criminals ’ was usedNONMET to explainNONMET what happenedNONMET in Handsworth , the problem of drugs was usedNONMET to explainNONMET what happenedNONMET at a national level .
The issue of drugs provided an everyday image , already a national issue through saturation media coverage and public debate , around which the police , the Home Office , and other institutions could depoliticizeMET the riots .
RespondingNONMET to the Handsworth events Douglas Hurd was movedMET to argueNONMET forcibly that such events were senseless and reflected more on those who participatedNONMET in them than on the society in which they tookMET place : ‘ The sound which law abiding people in Handsworth heardNONMET on Monday night , the echoes of which I pickedMET up on Tuesday , was not a cry for help but a cry for loot ’ ( Financial Times , 13 September 1985 ) .
The Chief Constable for the West Midlands , Geoffrey Dear , tookMET this argument further by pointingMET out that the day before the riots a successful carnival had takenMET place , with the support of local community leaders .
He drewMET the conclusion from this that the riot ‘ cameMET like a bolt out of the blue ’ ( Guardian , 21 November 1985 ) .
Such language focused attention on the individuals or groups who were ‘ breakingMET the law ’ , ‘ committingMET criminal acts ’ , and threateningMET the interests of the law-abiding ‘ majority ’ .
PART 2 Sociology and crime ExplainingNONMET crime : theories of criminality Most people have their own notions or theories as to what causesNONMET criminal behaviour .
For example , lack of discipline in the home , genetic defects , poverty , mixingMET with the ‘ wrong sort ’ have all been proposedNONMET as causes of criminality .
While such notions may all containsMET some elements of truth , they are by no means complete explanations of criminal behaviour .
This chapter will examineMET a range of theories which attemptMET to explainNONMET such behaviour .
Although the major theoretical explanations are coveredMET in the numerous introductions to the sociology of crime and deviance and to sociology generally , some review of these theories is necessary before embarkingMET upon an examination of specific , substantive examples of criminal behaviour .
As this is not a book on criminological theories , what followsMET will be a brief overview of a wide range of theories and explanations .
First , a word of warning might be in order .
It would be naive to expectNONMET to uncoverMET any ultimate explanation or basic cause for criminal behaviour , givenNONMET the extensive and diverse behaviour that is encompassedMET by the term crime .
SupposeNONMET , for example , that it could be provedNONMET that one cause of delinquency was lack of parental supervision .
It might still be necessary to askNONMET why delinquency occurredNONMET with one son or daughter but not another .
Also , there would be the further question of why the parents had not providedNONMET adequate supervision .
Perhaps this was because of their poor living conditions which would raiseMET the question of why they were in poor housing .
Was this because of governmental housing policy or a poor employment record on the part of the bread-winner of the family ?
Clearly , we are gettingMET further and further away from the causes of delinquent behaviour , and it is perhaps wisest to thinkNONMET in terms of causal processes when lookingMET at criminal behaviour .
Biological and psychological theories Before examiningNONMET the major sociological pespectives on crime , it is useful to referNONMET to theories from outside of sociology , from other academic disciplines .
Thus , we will lookMET initially at biological and psychological theories .
Biological theories Biological ( or physiological ) explanations are basedMET on the notion that some individuals are predisposedNONMET to criminal behaviour because of their genetic make-up .
The individual criminal is bornNONMET so ; and this is usually putMET down to ‘ faulty chromosome patterns ’ , or , more vaguely , to ‘ hereditary traits ’ .
The most famous exponent of this approach was the nineteenth-century Italian physician , Cesare Lombroso .
In his book L'Uomo Delinquente , Lombroso developedNONMET a complex description of what he calledMET the ‘ born criminal ’ , who could be recognisedNONMET by a variety of physical characteristics , in particular facial characteristics — for example large jaws and ears , and high cheek bones .
In the medical faculty at the University of Rome there is a gallery of portraits of splendidly ugly delinquents who were usedNONMET to illustrateMET Lombroso's theory .
To useNONMET his own language : Thus were explainedNONMET anatomically the enormous jaws , high cheek bones , prominent superciliary arches , solitary lines on the palms , extreme size of the orbits , handle shaped or sessile ears found in criminals , savages and apes , insensibility of pain , extremely acute sight , tattooingNONMET , excessive idleness , love of orgies and the irresistable craving for evil for its own sake … These explanations seeMET the delinquent individual as inherently more prone to criminal behaviour than the non-delinquent .
They have been widely criticisedNONMET and rejected by sociologists .
Lombroso's work , for example , was basedMET on his examination of people in prison in Italy .
This would , necessarily , ignoreMET the fact that many criminals do not goNONMET to prison , and that , perhaps , people in prison are not always criminal .
Most advocates of biological theories do not expressMET themselves in the same bizarre language and style as Lombroso , and such theories of crime are not merely historical relics that diedMET with Lombroso .
In a major study of institutionalised delinquents ( delinquents in some form of custody ) in the USA in the 1950s , Sheldon and Eleanor Glueck foundMET that delinquent boys were twice as likely to have a mesomorphic build , a chunky , muscular phsique , comparedNONMET with non-delinquent boys .
However , the fact that the study was restrictedMET to institutionalised delinquents limitsNONMET the validity of the association between body build and crime and delinquency .
It may be that tougher delinquents are more liable to be putMET away than fragile looking ones .
Furthermore , it has been foundMET that the association between delinquency on the one hand and height , weight and physique on the other is greatly reduced once social , background factors are takenMET into account .
For example , lower working-class people are more likely to be mesomorphic as a result of their diet and continual manual labour , and this class grouping is more likely to be foundMET representedNONMET in the criminal statistics .
With regard to the links between criminal behaviour and inherited characteristics , there have been a number of theoretical explanations suggestingMET an association between criminality and particular personality characteristics .
An example of this more sophisticated biological approach is the work of Hans Eysenck , who has arguedNONMET in a series of studies , that there is a link between genetically basedNONMET personality characteristics and criminal behaviour .
He maintainsMET that there is a link between characteristics such as extroversion and criminal behaviour .
An individual's degree of extroversion or introversion is inheritedMET , determinedMET by his or her genetic make-up .
The link with crime foundMET by Eysenck was that when prisoners were testedNONMET for extroversion , more extroverts were foundMET than in the general population .
Eysenck then arguesNONMET that extroversion is the inherited basis of criminal behaviour .
Extroverts takeMET longer to learnNONMET the rules of society , they are more likely to breakMET them , and thus more likely becomeNONMET convicted criminals .
As with Lombroso's work and the Gluecks ' study discussed above , by startingNONMET with institutionalised criminals , it is assumedMET that all prisoners are criminals and that most criminals do , in fact , goNONMET to prison .
The people who getNONMET caughtNONMET and imprisoned may not be a representative picture of all criminals .
The major problem facedMET by theories suggestingMET a link between genetic make-up and criminal behaviour is the difficulty of distinguishing between genetic and environmental effects .
While some genetic influence can not be ruled out , just what is inheritedMET remains very unclear .
Psychological theories These theories shareMET certain similarities with biological explanations .
They stressMET the link between criminal behaviour and specific personality traits or characteristics .
Psychological theories , however , seeMET these characteristics as a result of unusual or abnormal experiences , rather than as inheritedMET .
Thus , as with biological theories , crime is seenMET as pathological ( a disease ) , as something to be lookedMET at from the medical point of view .
However , psychological causes are seenNONMET as treatable , whereas biological causes markMET the individual for life .
In those cases there is no possible treatment , one is bornNONMET a criminal .
Many psychological theories referMET to faulty parent-child relationships , such as abnormal experiences in early childhood having a lasting effect and influence on personality .
Studies in this area have indicatedMET that too strict or too lax parental attitudes increaseNONMET the risk of delinquency ( the work of John Bowlby , for example ) ; they have foundMET that if a young child is deprived of close personal relationships with parents or parent figures then ‘ problem behaviour ’ is more common .
It is well established that in the delinquent-prone , home discipline is more liable to be too lax , strict or erratic .
However , it is patently obvious that parents can be a good or bad influence and example for their children , and this fact can hardly be usedNONMET to explainMET present patterns of crime .
The majority of offenders do not comeNONMET from disturbed or broken homes , and many broken homes do not produceMET delinquents .
Of course , this last point does not showMET that there is no link between parent-child relations and crime and delinquency .
The problem with assessingMET the influence of parental and family dimensions , such as weak supervision or parental criminality , is the fact that they are closely linkedMET to various aspects of social and economic disadvantage , such as poverty , overcrowdingNONMET and poor housing .
And it may be that these disadvantages helpNONMET to causeNONMET parental difficulties , and hamper good parenting .
We can hardly do justice to the wide scope of psychological theories here , but there are some basic ideas and assumptions which underlie such theorizing .
These stressMET the importance of family relationships and upbringing during the early years , and concludeMET that anti-social , and by implication criminal , behaviour results from faulty personality development .
To summariseNONMET , these biological and psychological theories holdMET that the criminal is a particular type of person , apart from the rest of society and with a special predisposition toward criminal behaviour .
They are basedMET on the idea that criminal behaviour is either inheritedMET or a consequence of unique , individual experiences .
Before we lookMET at sociological explanations it might be useful to askNONMET yourself , or to discussNONMET with colleagues , whether you feelMET that criminals are different ‘ types ’ of person .
While there are , no doubt , predispositions toward criminal behaviour , and clearly certain characteristics are inheritedMET , most sociologists would rejectNONMET these ‘ individual pathology ’ sort of theories .
They lackNONMET convincing supporting evidence .
While some offenders sufferNONMET from mental disorders the vast majority do not .
Furthermore , if criminals are abnormal then it followsMET that a large proportion of the population must also be abnormal .
For numerous studies have shownMET that a high percentage of the population have committedNONMET criminal offences , in particular high proportions of juveniles , and it is difficult to believeNONMET that they are all different or abnormal .
Sociological theories We saidNONMET above that sociologists would rejectNONMET non-sociological explanations of crime .
This is not because such explanations are ‘ wrong ’ , but because they are incomplete or inadequate .
In Chapter One , it was stressedMET that crime can not be consideredMET aside from its social context , that it is dependent on society definingNONMET certain actions as criminal , and on the reaction of others to such actions .
Potential Applications Overview Ian Masser GivenNONMET the extent to which geographic information management is applications driven , it is important to considerMET in some depth the characteristics of some potential application fields .
In the process it will be necessary to examineMET not only the extent to which geographic issues feature on the policy issues agenda in these fields but also the institutional context which governsMET decision-making and the extent to which data are available for research and policy analysis purposes .
Questions on data availability are likely to be particularly important where users are heavily dependent on secondary sources .
In situations of this kind provisions governing access and format may exertMET powerful constraints on the use that can be madeMET of these data .
The first four chapters in this part examineMET issues relatingNONMET to geographic information handling in terms of four potential applications fields .
The authors were askedNONMET to reviewNONMET the current state of the art in their fields with particular reference to the likely requirements of the future policy issues agenda in terms of the demands that they makeMET on geographic information management .
Authors were also askedNONMET to evaluateNONMET critically the state of geographic information provision in terms of the needs of users and to considerMET the impact of user requirements on the development of geographic information handling methodology .
In this way the chapters in this part present a number of perspectives which essentially complement and amplifyMET the discussion in the previous part .
In this case , however , methodological issues are tackledMET from a largely user standpoint , whereas in the previous part they were viewedMET as substantive problems in their own right .
In effect the product of the discussion in both parts is a matrix where the methodological issues are listedMET along one axis and particular applications fields on the other .
Figure 8.1 summarizesMET the main features of this matrix .
There are important differences between the chapters in this part both in the nature of the demands that they makeMET on geographic information and also in the relative importance that is attachedMET to geographic criteria as against other issues by planners and decision-makers in these fields .
The first three chapters dealingMET with environmental monitoring , natural and technological hazards and settlements and infrastructure applications makeMET use of a very wide range of geographic information .
A major feature of these applications is the extent to which they involveNONMET overlays of a variety of information drawnMET from different sources on a topographic map base .
for this reason they makeMET particularly heavy demands on current GIS technology both because of the size of the data  sets and the diversity of the data structures that are involvedNONMET .
Brown's chapter on geodemographics discussesMET an application field where primary data collected for operational purposes are typically evaluatedNONMET in relation to secondary data derivedMET from sources such as the Census of Population .
The range of data sets involved and the demands that are madeMET on GIS technology in applications of this kind are often more limited than those of previous applications fields .
However , this is offsetNONMET by the demands that are madeMET on spatial analysis and modelling methodology .
Rhind's chapter on environmental monitoring and prediction discussesMET the role of geographic information management in promotingNONMET sustainable development on a global scale in the context of the issues identifiedMET in the Brundtland report .
It pointsMET to the impact that the findings of global environmental research are likely to have on most sectors of the UK economy .
This contribution also indicatesMET the wide variety of groups that are involved in monitoringNONMET environmental change and drawsMET attention to the role that the European Community is increasingly playingMET in co-ordinatingMET these efforts .
One of the examples of work in progress discussesMET research that has been carried out for the European Commission as part of the CORINE Project .
This highlightsMET the challenges for research in a field categorizedNONMET by a lack of data for some countries , varying definitions and standards in use , and unreasonably high user expectations .
The chapter as a whole drawsMET attention to a number of key methodological issues that are involved in environmental monitoring and prediction .
These includeMET the highly specialized nature of much of the technical analysis , the limited capacity for checkingNONMET the accuracy of many of the findings of this kind of research and the consequent need for the development  of knowledge- based inference machines for extractingMET useful information from secondary and often proxy data .
In Chapter 10 Gatrell and Vincent considerNONMET a wide range of natural and technological hazards including industrial hazards , risk assessment , hazardous waste disposal , emergency planning , natural hazards and environmental epidemiology .
The substantive content of much of this research straddlesNONMET the social , environmental and mathematical sciences .
To modelNONMET the dispersal of a plume of toxic gas generatedNONMET by a chemical explosion and its impact on the surrounding area , for example , an understanding of atmospheric dispersion models , epidemiology and population distribution would be requiredNONMET .
In applications of this kind the authors argueNONMET that geographic information management in general and GIS in particular have an important role to playNONMET and they giveNONMET a number of examples from research in progress to illustrateNONMET the current state of the art in this field .
The discussion of operational problems and prospects further amplifiesNONMET many of the issues raisedNONMET in preceding chapters , particularly with respect to the problems causedNONMET by the dependency on secondary data sources and the need for much more detailed geographic information to overcomeNONMET some of the problems associatedNONMET with linkingNONMET data sets .
Like most of the other contributors to this section , Gatrell and Vincent seeNONMET decision support systems as a major area for future development in the geographic information management field .
Given that ‘ most GIS are rather dumb systems , requiringNONMET intelligent , very computer literate users ’ , managing natural and technological hazards meansNONMET that this knowledge base must be builtNONMET into the system so that it can be utilizedNONMET quickly by untrained users after a disaster has takenNONMET place or in an emergency .
The settlement and infrastructure field is also characterizedNONMET by a wide range of users with a great diversity of interests .
These includeNONMET not only central and local government but also major utility companies and transport suppliers .
According to Shepherd these users shareNONMET a common need for up-to-date information on the amount , capacity and condition of urban land , transport networks , utilities , hospitals , schools and other major communal facilities .
In addition to these data requirements , such users are also interested in developingNONMET their capabilities for modellingNONMET the changing relationships between the supply and demand for infrastructure in the context of both public and private sector decision-making .
Shepherd , more than any other contributor to this section , drawsNONMET attention to the extent to which current efforts in the geographic information management field are constrainedNONMET by the highly fragmented nature of both data suppliers and users both in sectoral and spatial terms , the great diversity of data sets in varying formats and the difficulties presentedNONMET by institutional factors such as copyright provision , data ownership and the control of access to data .
Digital data occupyNONMET a central position in this applications field and a number of examples are givenNONMET to illustrateNONMET the extent to which their development has been hamperedNONMET or facilitated in various countries by the policies of the organizations with responsibility for digital data provision .
In Chapter 12 Brown reviewsNONMET the development of geodemographics from its origins in the computer-based social area analysis of US census tract data from 1950 onwards .
He describesNONMET the features of the four main systems that are currently in use in the UK and illustratesNONMET their application with reference to examples drawnNONMET from retail analysis and store location , market research , credit rating and target marketing .
Brown demonstratesNONMET the extent to which the growth of research activities in this field has ledNONMET to the emergence of improved cluster analytic methods for the multidimensional classification of people according to the type of area in which they liveNONMET .
In the last part of this contribution , Brown identifiesNONMET a number of priorities for future research .
Like Gatrell and Vincent and Shepherd before him , he is concerned with the lack of detailed geographical information particularly in this case with reference to the years between censuses .
Spatial linkages also feature prominently in Brown's discussion which amplifiesNONMET many of the points made in the earlier contribution from Openshaw in Chapter 3 .
The analysis points to the need for the development of a fuzzy geodemographics methodology which takesNONMET account of the effects of different types of spatial errors .
Other major research priorities for the future in this applications field are the development of response-modelling techniques to exploreNONMET the factors affectingNONMET consumer choice .
This is particularly important in a field where many of the demands madeNONMET by users are highly specializedNONMET in nature .
In summary , then , as fig. 8.1 showsNONMET , many of the issues raisedNONMET by this review of geographic information handling in the four potential application fields are essentially complementary to those discussedNONMET in the part on methodological developments .
Spatial analysis features particularly prominent on the research agenda relatingNONMET to natural and technological hazards and geodemographics .
Questions relatingNONMET to data integration emergeNONMET as being particularly critical in terms of environmental monitoring and settlement and infrastructure applications .
Spatial linkages and questions relatingNONMET to spatial representation feature prominently in the settlements and infrastructure and geodemographics fields .
The evaluation of error propagation is a matter of considerable significance in the environmental monitoring and settlements and infrastructure fields .
Finally , in all applications fields , the findings of the reviews above suggestNONMET that there is a need for improvements in user interfaces of all kinds .
This is particularly evident in the demand for the development of knowledge-based decision support systems and modelling capabilities .
Such demands highlightNONMET the extent to which geographic information management must be regardedNONMET as a means to an end rather than an end in itself when viewedNONMET from the standpoints of the needs of planners and decision-makers .
The final chapter in this section roundsNONMET off the discussion of applications-related research with an examination of organizational issues that need to be takenNONMET account of in handlingNONMET geographic information .
Campbell presentsNONMET a conceptual framework for the analysis of the organizational issues involvedNONMET in the development and implementation of GIS .
This contribution cuts across many of the questions relatingNONMET to particular applications that were raisedNONMET in preceding chapters and drawsNONMET attention to the dangers of neglectingNONMET institutional and personal considerations in practice .
All too often , as the experience of many mature applications indicatesNONMET , technical and data-related matters dominateNONMET the system development phase and technically elegant solutions are devisedNONMET which failNONMET to takeNONMET enough account of user needs and capabilities .
Campbell discussesNONMET the role of geographic information in organizations and the process of GIS diffusion drawing upon research from a variety of social science disciplines .
The findings of the analysis are summarizedNONMET in two sets of research questions for all applications fields .
In this way she setsNONMET out a research agenda for applications-related research which servesNONMET a similar function to the spatial analysis research agenda set out by Openshaw at the beginning of Part Two .
Environmental monitoring and prediction David Rhind Introduction Monitoring of the state of and the changes in the environment is now universally recognizedNONMET as being of profound importance to mankind ( Tickell 1986 , 1989 ) .
This awareness is most obviously manifestedNONMET by the frequent appearance of press reports on ozone depletion , on the greenhouse effect and possible global warming , on nitrate pollution , on deforestation in the Tropics , on decreasing biological diversity and on many other environmentally related topics .
Usually these reports concentrateNONMET on prophecies of a forthcoming Armageddon but many also describeNONMET a dire contemporary situation .
Thus the algal bloom off the Italian Adriatic shore in 1989 is reckonedNONMET to have causedNONMET the holiday trade and local fisherman losses runningNONMET into tens if not hundreds of millions of pounds .
More globally , the Brundtland Report ( WCED 1987 ) notedNONMET that , in the 900 days during which the World Commission was at work , 1 .
The African drought putNONMET the lives of 35 million people at risk and may have killedNONMET 1 million of them ; 2 .
The Bhopal accident killed 2000 and injuredNONMET 200 000 more ; 3 .
The Chernobyl disaster caused environmental damage across Europe ; 4 .
A chemical fire in Switzerland causedNONMET toxic materials to be transportedNONMET by the Rhine at least as far as the Netherlands ; 5 .
At least 60 million people diedNONMET of diarrhoeal diseases causedNONMET by malnutrition and dirty water .
As a consequence of these and other disasters , of rapid and world-wide broadcasting of them and of the concerned action of many individuals , the environment is now ‘ movingNONMET fast up the political agenda ’ ( Patten 1989 ) .
The then Prime Minister also emphasized the political awakening to the environment in statements such as : ‘ it is possible that with all these enormous changes ( population , agricultural , use of fossil fuels ) concentrated into such a short period of time , we have unwittingly begunNONMET a massive experiment with the system of this planet itself ’ ( Thatcher 1988 ) .
The political concern is not altruistic .
Mrs Thatcher , a recent convert to environmental conservation , clearly held the opinion that environmental problems are not only soluble but that solvingNONMET them can be shownNONMET to be cost-effective : In the past when we identifiedNONMET forms of pollution , we have shownNONMET our capacity to actNONMET effectively .
The great London smogs are now only a nightmare of the past .
We have cutNONMET airborne lead by 50 per cent .
We are spendingNONMET £4 billion on cleansingNONMET the Mersey Basin alone , and the Thames now has the cleanest metropolitan estuary in the world .
Even though this kind of action may costNONMET a lot , I believeNONMET it to be money well and necessarily spentNONMET because the health of our economy and the health of our environment are totally dependent upon each other … .
The Government espousesNONMET the concept of sustainable economic development .
Stable prosperity can be achievedNONMET throughout the world provided the environment is nurturedNONMET and safeguardedNONMET ( Thatcher 1988 ) .
The primary official manifestation of this UK commitment to the environment has been the government's White Paper ( HMSO 1990 ) .
While criticizedNONMET by many on the grounds that it had few ‘ teeth ’ and representedNONMET a compromise between the DoE and all other departments ( notably those of Agriculture and of Transport ) , it was none the less a major achievement .
Its main sections dealtNONMET with the government's approach to the environment ( nationally , at the European level and globally ) , the nature and effects of the greenhouse effect , environmental problems in both rural and urban areas ( especially in relation to land-use matters ) , pollution control and enhancingNONMET awareness of environmental matters .
Central to this approach is saidNONMET to be an emphasis upon guidance from the best available scientific evidence .
There is also a clear recognition of the need for monitoring and modelling of the state of the natural and man-influenced environment .
Though there has been a change of Prime Minister and of the Secretary of State for the Environment since the publication of the White Paper , the environmental cause seemsNONMET as strong as ever .
Thus , The Times of 17 December 1990 reportedNONMET that a group of 40 of the most senior Civil Servants had metNONMET the previous weekend to discussNONMET ‘ ways in which the government machine could respondNONMET better to national and international problems such as the threat of global climate change ’ .
Pearce et al. ( 1989 ) have arguedNONMET that the effects of government , commercial and other actions on the environment can and should be assessedNONMET on a cost/benefit basis and this seemsNONMET likely to be the basis on which at least the UK government will proceedNONMET .
GivenNONMET such a lead , it is scarcely surprising that British scientists have soughtNONMET to demonstrateNONMET the practical and financial consequences of environmental events and processes ; Table 9.1 , for example illustratesNONMET their perception of the importance of global environmental research to the UK domestic economy .
If it now seemsNONMET self-evident that monitoring of the global environment is necessary , indeed is even vital , the prediction of what is likely to happenNONMET is almost as important : the 170 000 people in the Maldives are understandably worried about the prospect of global sea-level change since no part of the islands is more than 2 m above present sea-level !
Yet , as we shall seeNONMET below , the prediction of the activities of natural and man-influenced environmental systems requiresNONMET an understanding of the interaction of processes that , in many cases , we simply do not yet have .
Even monitoring of the present is very imperfect , as witness the order of magnitude variations in estimates now current for deforestation rates .
This chapter , then , attempts to reviewNONMET some of the problems in environmental monitoring and prediction , describesNONMET some of the relevant scientific and organizational activities and looksNONMET ahead to what is likely to happenNONMET next .
The nature of environmental processes Notwithstanding Mrs Thatcher's confidence that we can ‘ fixNONMET ’ environmental problems , the difficulties associatedNONMET with a task even as apparently simple as monitoringNONMET a state variable are considerable .
Some of the reasons for this — the difficulty of decidingNONMET on appropriate proxy variables and on economical yet non-biasing temporal and spatial sampling frameworks , takingNONMET account of the relative importance of aperiodic and rare events as comparedNONMET to near-continuous processes , processingNONMET the vast volumes of data usually involvedNONMET and organizingNONMET the multidisciplinary and ( often ) multinational researchers involved — are discussedNONMET briefly later .
Even at this stage , however , it is important to stressNONMET that we have a very incomplete understanding of many processes in the natural environment .
The next section therefore attemptsNONMET to summarizeNONMET what we do knowNONMET ; it is derivedNONMET chiefly from the Earth System Sciences Committee ( ESSC ) ( 1988 ) .
Temporal and spatial scales of operation Even ignoringNONMET the effects of man , earth system processes operateNONMET at a variety of spatial and temporal scales ( seeNONMET Fig. 9.1 ; seeNONMET also Rosswall et al. 1988 ) .
Thus microclimate effects can have major short-term implications for local populations ( such as those broughtNONMET about by the photochemical smogs of Los Angeles ) , are often applicable only over areas of a few hectares or less and may operateNONMET on a diurnal cycle .
In contrast , soil creation ( cf.NONMET soil degradation ) may requireNONMET hundreds or thousands of years .
In between are variations in phenomena such as El Nino .
The sampling theorem indicatesNONMET that we must sampleNONMET these phenomena at a frequency of no less than half their wavelength if we are to avoidNONMET bias in measurement .
In this chapter , the primary concern is with changes occurringNONMET over time spans from minutes to centuries and from spatial wavelengths from about 1 m to about 100 km .
It is , however , impossible to separateNONMET out processes actingNONMET at different scales and over different periods : a single volcanic eruption lasting hours or days sometimes leadsNONMET to dustNONMET and gas being ejectedNONMET into the atmosphere over a period of months and this in turn may leadNONMET to global climatic fluctuations over years or decades .
Conversely , a large-scale and long-period phenomenon such as the movement of tectonic plates can leadNONMET to local stress accumulation and to its release by an earthquake in a few seconds and with highly local effects .
This therefore has the following consequences : 1 .
We should knowNONMET something about the periodicity of the variables we are monitoringNONMET if we are not to riskNONMET either unnecessarily detailed data collection or aliasing of trends ; 2 .
Since we knowNONMET that the periodicity of some variables is longer than the monitoring already carriedNONMET out by human beings , we must makeNONMET use of surrogate or proxy variables to extendNONMET our range of knowledge ( such as via tree rings , palynology , oxygen isotope ratios from ice cores and geomorphological evidence of environmental change ) ; 3 .
Since we are not yet able to predictNONMET all the interactions which may be important in a study of environmental problems , collectingNONMET potentially useful data as well as those believedNONMET central to the problem under study is often wise ; 4 .
We must acceptNONMET that most data collection exercises will inevitably be a compromise on the grounds of cost and hence less than perfect data sets will be producedNONMET ; 5 .
Irrespective of the use of surrogates , monitoringNONMET environmental processes only makesNONMET sense over time-scales which are extendedNONMET by human standards ( hence the IGBP ( seeNONMET below ) is designedNONMET to runNONMET for two or three decades ) ; 6 .
Changes in political priorities may simply resultNONMET in the need for informed guesswork if suitable data are not available .
Much attention will be givenNONMET throughout this chapter to monitoringNONMET the environment on a global basis .
This is not merely because of its topical nature .
The main reason is that — though some problems are local and are best studiedNONMET that way — many others ( even involvingNONMET a limited geographical extent ) are best understoodNONMET within a global framework .
Thus no meteorologist would attemptNONMET to forecastNONMET the weather 2 or 3 days ahead without usingNONMET a mathematical model basedNONMET on observations from all around the world .
Moreover , recent work has shownNONMET that much of the heat energy in the seas of the North Atlantic ( every square kilometre of which givesNONMET off as much energy as a nuclear power station and hence influencesNONMET our weather ) is absorbedNONMET from sunlight in the tropical Pacific and is carriedNONMET by ocean currents through the Drake Passage and up into the Atlantic .
Thus , to understandNONMET some local and many regional , national and continental and all global environmental events , we needNONMET to have a global perspective and holdNONMET global databases ( Rhind and Mounsey 1989 ; Mounsey and Tomlinson 1988 ) .
In no way , however , does this invalidateNONMET the need for microscale studies — for instance , while global data sets may indicateNONMET the extent of algal blooms and may suggestNONMET causes of them , only detailed study of the algae themselves can provideNONMET understanding of why the bloom is occurringNONMET .
The processes themselves A major complication , however , is that the environment can rarely be treatedNONMET as in a laboratory experiment .
GivenNONMET this , determiningNONMET the nature of the interactions between the variables becomesNONMET a matter of major difficulty .
Figure 9.2 is takenNONMET from ESSC ( 1988 ) and is an attempt to showNONMET the interactions between environmental processes , as well as the indicators and implications of change in the state of the environment .
In essence , the figure can be summarizedNONMET as showingNONMET processes within the physical climate system and within the biogeochemical one , these systems being interwovenNONMET by the global role of water and increasingly affectedNONMET by human activities .
The main components of the first system are well knownNONMET : the atmosphere is its engine and atmospheric circulation is drivenNONMET by differences in solar heating between the equatorial and polar regions .
We are , however , becomingNONMET ever more aware of the massive influence of oceans on our climate ; research into ocean/atmosphere interactions is now a priority .
In ocean dynamics studies , important topics are heat storage , circulation and the role of sea ice .
Atmospheric circulation ( and , in turn , precipitation and temperature ) is also greatly affectedNONMET by the balance of thermal energy at the land surface , itself affectedNONMET by the vegetation and terrain characteristics .
The biogeochemical system embracesNONMET the totality of the movements of the key elements essential to life — carbon , nitrogen , oxygen , phosphorus and others — through what has been describedNONMET as the total earth system .
The oceans and their biota playNONMET a central role in the carbon and nutrient cycles ; global ocean circulation is also critical to the global carbon budget .
Trace gases in the atmosphere are key components of the cycles of such elements as carbon , nitrogen , oxygen , sulphur and the halogens ; as is now well knownNONMET , their concentrations are much influencedNONMET by biogenic and anthropogenic activities and the concentrations of such gases as carbon dioxide , ozone , methane , nitrous oxide and the chlorofluoromethanes ( CFMs ) strongly affectNONMET radiative transfer and provideNONMET a link with the physical climate system .
A particular cause for concern is that the concentrations of the two main CFMs is increasingNONMET by about 5 per cent per annum while the equivalent figures for methane , nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide are 1 , 0.4 and 0.3 per cent .
Finally , the chemistry of the stratosphere is dominatedNONMET by the photochemical production and catalytic destruction of ozone .
There are several important ways in which biogeochemical processes can influenceNONMET climate and hence habitability ( except where the latter is maintainedNONMET at enormous cost ) .
If , for instance , the concentrations of certain trace gases ( seeNONMET above ) continueNONMET to increaseNONMET , it has been predictedNONMET that the earth's surface temperature will increaseNONMET by an amount comparable to that since the last major phase of the most recent glaciation ( about 18 000 years BP ) — though there is some dispute about the magnitude of the likely change .
The converse case — the effect of physical climate changes on biogeochemical processes — is also of obvious importance : changes in annual averages and cycles of temperature and precipitation , together with the probabilities of extreme events such as prolonged droughts or frosts , are major determinants of terrestrial ecosystem type , at least in areas largely unaffected by human activity .
Human-induced changes to the environment have increasedNONMET rapidly as a consequence of growing population numbers and of numerous developments in technology .
fossil fuel combustion , for instance , has ledNONMET to increased concentrations of sulphate in precipitation ( ’ acid rain' ) and many rivers , lakes and estuaries have been greatly affectedNONMET by phosphates from agricultural , urban or industrial sources .
It should be stressedNONMET , however , that — while the outlines of human activities are clear — there are still many uncertainties : for instance , we knowNONMET that the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide has risenNONMET about 9 per cent since 1959 .
But calculations of the total carbon releasedNONMET by fossil fuel combustion implyNONMET that , if all such carbon remained in the atmosphere , the concentration would have increasedNONMET by twice as much .
The absolute difference between the two figures seemsNONMET to be due to two different factors : absorption by the oceans and other reductions in carbon stocks in living biota , the latter being strongly affectedNONMET by human activities since the Industrial Revolution .
Does God playNONMET dice ?
Much environmental prediction is predicatedNONMET upon a logical positivist or Newtonian deterministic basis .
The environmental systems are effectively regardedNONMET as machines whose workings can all be discoveredNONMET , described in differential equation form and whose future activities can thus be predictedNONMET in detail if their initial states are knownNONMET .
An argument by many atmospheric physicists , for example , is that shortcomings in the accuracy of weather prediction over periods of more than a few days largely results from the unsophisticated nature of existing models , the lack of suitable data and inadequate computer power ( seeNONMET Fig. 9.3 , derivedNONMET from Tyler 1989 ) .
In contrast , the advocates of chaos theory ( e.g. Stewart 1989 ) argueNONMET that some natural systems are so sensitive to tiny stimuli that even ‘ the faint beat of a butterfly's wing could be the ultimate trigger for a hurricane ’ .
In essence , they argueNONMET that tiny differences in the initial conditions of many systems can leadNONMET to widely different outcomes since the systems exhibitNONMET stochastic behaviour within a deterministic framework .
If so , there is little chance of makingNONMET accurate long-term forecasts of these systems .
This has been recognizedNONMET by , among others , ESSC ( 1988 ) .
The authors of that report accepted that there is a theoretical limit of 2–3 weeks in explicit prediction of day-to-day fluctuations in weather because of the influence of small-scale turbulence within the large-scale dynamics ; such limits implyNONMET that medium and long-term prediction must inevitably be stochastic .
To complicateNONMET matters still further , however , it seemsNONMET at least possible that the components of the earth system may best be predictedNONMET deterministically at some spatial and temporal scales but stochastically at others and that the basis of prediction will differNONMET for different components .
As an example , atmospheric temperature shows marked day-to-day variability , a strong seasonal cycle with some year-to-year variations , a weak minimum variability for 10–20 year averages and then increased variation again at longer time-scales ( ESSC 1988 ) .
It need hardly be pointedNONMET out that coping with such multiple databases on which modelling is to be carriedNONMET out is not a trivial exercise .
Finally , it is perhaps worth concludingNONMET this section by emphasizingNONMET that there is still much controversy among the scientific community about the magnitude of many of the effects being discussedNONMET .
In general , the research work of the international groups of scientists , including those involved in the Inter-Governmental Committee and in the UK's Inter-Agency Committee on Global Environmental Change , has progressively reducedNONMET the magnitude of the predicted effects of , for example , global warming .
In givingNONMET the 1990 Robens Coal Science Lecture at the Royal Institution , Sir John Mason ( a former Director of the Meteorological Office ) urgedNONMET caution in interpretingNONMET the results of the massive atmospheric and oceanic modelling exercises ; as the equilibrium models are refined to takeNONMET account of the thermal lag in oceans , etc. , lower values of predicted changes are likely .
Thus , while almost all scientists are — at the time of writing — convinced from the evidence that change in climate is under way and that regional effects may be much greater than the global average , the magnitude of the latter is now thoughtNONMET likely to be about half of what was predictedNONMET only 5 years ago .
Who is involvedNONMET and what is goingNONMET on ?
If we considerNONMET the environment in the broadest sense , much monitoring of it has been in progress for many years and by an enormous diversity of organizations in the UK ; these includeNONMET the DoE , the Forestry Commission , the Nature Conservancy , the Health and Safety Executive , local authorities , the component members of the Natural Environment Research Council ( such as the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology and the British Antarctic Survey ) , individuals or research groups in academia , the CEGB , the Friends of the Earth , and UK Centre for Economic and Environmental Development ( CEED ) ( 1989 ) .
The diversity of monitoring organizations seemsNONMET just as great in other countries ; numerous multinational organizations , both quasi-governmental ( e.g. the UN Environment Programme ( UNEP ) ) and non-governmental ( e.g. the International Union for the Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) and the International Institute for Environment and Development ( IIED ) ) are also active in the field .
Moreover , commercial monitoring of the environment is now also routine , notably to predictNONMET crop yields in the main grain-growing areas and hence facilitateNONMET the buying of futures .
The international scientific involvement Scientists have both promotedNONMET and respondedNONMET to the increasing interest in the environment .
Thus , at the global scale , the International Council of Scientific Unions ( ICSU ) has endorsedNONMET the setting up of the International Geosphere Biosphere Project ( IGBP ) to ‘ describeNONMET and understandNONMET the interactive physical , chemical and biological processes that regulateNONMET the total Earth system , the unique environment it providesNONMET for life , the changes that are occurringNONMET in that system and the manner by which these changes are influencedNONMET by human actions ’ ( Report of ad hoc Planning Group for IGBP 1986 , quoted in IGBP 1988 ) .
Priority in the IGBP is intendedNONMET to be givenNONMET to those areas which deal with key interactions and significant changes on the time-scales of decades to centuries , that most affectNONMET the biosphere , that are most susceptible to human perturbations and those that will most likely leadNONMET to a practical , predictive capability for global change .
This is to be putNONMET into operation by concentratingNONMET on four themes : 1 .
DocumentingNONMET and predictingNONMET global change ; 2 .
ObservingNONMET and improvingNONMET our understanding of dominant forcing functions ; 3 .
ImprovingNONMET our understanding of interactive phenomena in the total Earth system ; 4 .
AssessingNONMET those effects of global change which will be large scale and cause major modifications to both renewable and non-renewable resources .
By 1990 , IGBP had progressedNONMET as far as definingNONMET a set of seven core projects ( IGBP 1990 ) addressingNONMET these four themes .
In addition , plans for regional research centres and for the data and information systems for IGBP ( knownNONMET as IGBP-DIS ) had been announcedNONMET .
The latter are particularly relevant to this chapter .
BasedNONMET in Paris and workingNONMET under Professor I. Rasool , it is intendedNONMET to concentrateNONMET on managerial and policy aspects of the task in the first 2 years ( 1990–92 ) but then to expandNONMET considerably thereafter .
Tasks agreed for the IGBP-DIS includeNONMET makingNONMET available a ‘ directory of data directories ’ modelledNONMET on NASA's Master Directory , providingNONMET data sets for education and training and undertakingNONMET a land cover pilot study .
Until 1990 , remarkably little interaction had takenNONMET place between the ‘ hard science ’ and the social science communities on global monitoring and prediction .
It is noteworthy , however , that the Royal Society madeNONMET a plea for just this type of multidisciplinary work in its submission on greenhouse gases to the House of Lords ' Select Committee on Science and Technology ( Royal Society 1989 : 40 ) .
Fortunately , in addition to the actions of the world ‘ hard science ’ community , a parallel effort is now being initiatedNONMET by social scientists ( Fuchs 1989 ; Jacobson and Price 1990 ) .
Currently this is organizedNONMET and sponsoredNONMET by the International Social Science Council ( ISSC ) , the UN University and the International Federation of Institutes of Advanced Studies .
Its objectives are to : 1 .
ImproveNONMET scientific understanding and increase awareness of the complex dynamics governing human interaction with the total Earth system ; 2 .
Study , exploreNONMET and anticipateNONMET social change affectingNONMET the global environment ; 3 .
IdentifyNONMET broad social strategies to preventNONMET or mitigateNONMET undesirable impacts of global change or to adaptNONMET to changes which are unavoidable ; 4 .
AnalyseNONMET policy options for dealingNONMET with global environmental change and promotingNONMET the goal of sustainable development .
Jacobson and Price ( 1990 ) provideNONMET a useful summary of the ways in which human factors contributeNONMET to , and are affectedNONMET by , likely global changes ; in particular , they stressNONMET the importance of the data-handling issues and the role of GIS in copingNONMET with some of the problems of data integration and manipulation .
The ISSC proposedNONMET its own work programme in the Human Dimensions of Global Change in late 1990 .
While these organizations intrinsically have a world-wide membership and are concerned with research into global environmental change , others shareNONMET the same interest but from a more restricted geographical base .
A leading example of this is the European Science Foundation which has sponsoredNONMET research programmes in both the physical and social science aspects of environmental change ( ESF 1990 ) .
Governmental and political involvement The spread of environmental awareness is readily demonstratedNONMET : in 1972 , 26 countries had environmental and natural resource management agencies whereas , a decade later the number was 144 ( WEC 1985 ) .
In most countries , the governmental and political concern with the environment has comeNONMET somewhat later than that of scientists or concerned lay people : the early development of the Green Party in the Federal Republic of Germany is something of an exception .
Such a commitment to the environment is , none the less , both welcome and necessary if resources are to be madeNONMET available to tackleNONMET existing , let alone forthcoming , environmental problems .
The ‘ conversion ’ of the UK government has been briefly describedNONMET earlier ; it is manifestedNONMET in their July 1989 commitment to spendNONMET £10m. on climate change research in 1989/90 and the confident request to them from the Advisory Board for the Research Councils ( ABRC ) for an extra £11m. in 1990 and £13m. in the two succeeding years for additional environmental research .
Perhaps the most significant development of all , however , is the increasing role of the European Commission .
Their role in bringingNONMET environmental impact assessment ( EIA ) on to the statute book is well knownNONMET , but the Commission has now madeNONMET a proposal ( CEC 1989 ) for the ‘ establishment of the European Environment Agency and the European Environment Monitoring and Information Network ’ .
The Commission arguesNONMET that there is at present no monitoring of environmental quality and trends on a European scale , nor any guarantee that the results of environmental monitoring will be comparable on a Community-wide basis ( a realization broughtNONMET about through the CORINE programme described later ) .
The objectives of the new agency would be to assistNONMET the Community and the Member States to achieveNONMET the goals setNONMET out in the Treaty of Rome and in successive environmental action programmes ; it must also , however , be seenNONMET in the context of the European Council's adoption on 2 December 1988 of the Rhodes Declaration on the Environment and the environment chapter in the Single European Act which comesNONMET into effect in 1992 .
The detailed specific roles of ‘ the System ’ ( comprisingNONMET both agency and network ) are envisagedNONMET as : 1 .
To provideNONMET the Community , the Member States and participating third countries with the objective ( sic ) information requestedNONMET for the formulation and implementation of sound and effective environmental policies ; 2 .
In particular , to provideNONMET technical , scientific and economic information requestedNONMET by the Commission in its tasks of identification , preparation and assessment of the implementation and results of environmental action and legislation ; 3 .
To stimulateNONMET the development and the application within the agency of techniques of environmental modelling and forecasting in order that adequate preventative action can be takenNONMET at the appropriate time ; 4 .
To helpNONMET ensureNONMET the harmonization and comparability of environmental data in the Community as well as the integration of European environmental data into international environmental monitoring programmes , such as those establishedNONMET within the framework of the United Nations and its system of agencies .
Considerable stress is laidNONMET by the Commission on collaboration with national data-gathering agencies and with states adjacent to the Community's borders .
It is envisagedNONMET that the totality of activities will extendNONMET the existing State of the European Environment report ( CEC 1988 ) through addressingNONMET the issues of the quality and sensitivity of the environment and also the pressures upon it .
Priorities for the new agency includeNONMET study of atmospheric emissions and quality , water resources and quality ( including the marine environment ) , soil erosion and pollution and important land resources , and biotopes and nature conservation .
At the time of writing , the proposal has been approvedNONMET and discussions are in progress on the location of the agency's headquarters .
It seemsNONMET certain to have major and growing effects upon environmental monitoring and prediction in Europe and on the policies of component governments .
Yet this is by no means the only plan which the Community has in relation to the environment : Directorate-General XII ( that for Science , Research and Development ) has publishedNONMET details of an extensive R&D programme ( CEC 1990a ) and the Commission as a whole ( CEC 1990b ) has madeNONMET public its plans to developNONMET regular official statistics of the environment .
The private sector Certain aspects of environmental monitoring have long been carriedNONMET out by the private sector , notably that of crop states on a world-wide basis .
DerivedNONMET from satellite imagery at comparatively low resolution , predicted yields for different crops in different nation states becomeNONMET of commercial value .
However , significant resources are also being madeNONMET available by the private sector where there is no immediate commercial gain : thus IBM UK Ltd has donatedNONMET £3.5m. of computing equipment to UNEPNONMET and IBM in general is actively supporting other R&D which can be expectedNONMET to facilitateNONMET ‘ sustainable development ’ : IBM Europe , for instance , has investedNONMET $16m. in its Bergen scientific centre to makeNONMET it the focal point for the company's environmental modelling and a centre for information on the environment and sustainable development .
On a more modest basis , IBM UK have agreedNONMET to fundNONMET a pilot global population database being builtNONMET in Birkbeck College to permitNONMET assessment of the impact of environmental change on the world s population .
Many other companies , of course , are supporting environmental work but IBM seemsNONMET almost to be unique in its corporate commitment to useNONMET of high technology for facilitatingNONMET ‘ sustainable development ’ .
Some examples of environmental monitoring projects The local scale At the local scale , it is usually impossible to neglectNONMET the effects of multiple processes operating .
An example of environmental modelling and prediction where the interactions between different processes and dynamic feedback is takenNONMET into account is givenNONMET by Haber and Schaller ( 1988 ) .
Their work formedNONMET part of one UNESCO Man and Biosphere ( MAB ) project , carriedNONMET out in the Berchtesgaden National Park in Bavaria .
FollowingNONMET Holling ( 1978 ) and Grossman ( 1983 ) , they conceptualizedNONMET the man/environment relationship at a series of hierarchical levels : 1 .
The lowest , or process , level , is directly and ( usually ) obviously connectedNONMET to perceived reality .
Thus processes and interrelationships are mostly obvious , simple and linear ; data are usually readily available and may be voluminous .
This level is readily handledNONMET in commercial GIS ; , 2 .
The intermediate , or dynamic , level is concerned with less frequent and often irregular events , e.g. a temporary lack of water because of fire , frost or excessive demand from an increasing populace .
Characteristically , the data used may be more difficult to obtainNONMET and are usually more spatially aggregated ; modelling software which permitsNONMET feedback loops is essential ; 3 .
The top , or strategic , level is the most difficult to exploreNONMET ; the external influences are often unpredictable by formal means .
Relevant data are therefore difficult to identifyNONMET and scenario building is one of the few approaches available .
The Haber and Schaller approach is to ‘ soft-couple ’ these different levels and their accompanying approaches usingNONMET an ecological balance model .
Results of runningNONMET this with different scenarios includeNONMET ‘ time slice ’ maps of possible outcomes and of the exchange of material and energy within the study area .
While ultimately qualitative , it seemsNONMET to offerNONMET a method for copingNONMET with different types of process and incorporatingNONMET stochastic and truly random events .
The national and continental scale : the CORINE project The CORINE programme representsNONMET the product of much activity by the European Commission's Directorate-General ( XI ) for the Environment .
It originatesNONMET from an Italian request to the Council of Ministers in 1973 to identifyNONMET environmentally ‘ balanced ’ and ‘ unbalanced ’ areas in the Community ; the first attempts to do this were unsuccessful and , though by 1981 it was clear that a new approach basedNONMET on an environmental information system was the most promising one , funding for this was not securedNONMET until 1985 .
A 4-year experimental programme to ‘ collectNONMET , co-ordinate and ensureNONMET the consistency of information on the state of the environment and natural resources in the European Communities ’ was setNONMET up and labelled CORINE .
The objectives of CORINE were to be achievedNONMET through bringingNONMET together existing data holdings in the member states , developing methods for holdingNONMET , analysingNONMET and presentingNONMET the data , and encouragingNONMET the exchange of data .
A number of priority areas were identifiedNONMET , including biotopes of importance for nature conservation , acid deposition and its effects on soils and biotopes and the protection of the environment of the Mediterranean region ( Briggs and Martin 1988 ) .
Many achievements can be claimedNONMET by the CORINE project team .
As a result of some 40 sub-projects involvingNONMET all the Member States ( and often several groups within each one ) , databases of topography , soils , water resources and quality , biotopes , atmospheric emissions , climate , soil erosion and administrative boundaries have been builtNONMET up for the whole Community and can be interrelated ; other data sets ( such as land cover , derivedNONMET from satellite imagery ) have already been compiledNONMET for some of the Member States .
Various aspects of the CORINE project have been describedNONMET in papers by Rhind et al. ( 1986 ) , Wiggins et al. ( 1987 ) , Briggs and Martin ( 1988 ) , Briggs and Mounsey ( 1989 ) and CEC ( 1990c ) .
For the present purposes , however , the key findings are : 1 .
Many necessary data sets were unavailable for reasons of administrative inadequacies , confidentiality constraints , cost or non-collection in certain countries ; 2 .
The unavoidable reliance upon existing data sets ledNONMET to many problems due to non-harmonization even of commonly used variables , e.g. eight different definitions of potential evapo-transpiration were in use in the Member States and ‘ maximum temperature ’ at each weather station was definedNONMET in at least four different ways ; 3 .
The compilation of a spatially coherent database from mapped information compiledNONMET by different organizations at different scales and on different topographic bases ( seeNONMET Rhind and Clark 1988 ) is often difficult ; 4 .
User expectations are often unreasonably high ; use of administrative computing systems encouragesNONMET bureaucrats to believeNONMET that environmental data can just as readily be analysedNONMET and usedNONMET to supportNONMET decisions .
The ‘ fuzzy ’ nature of much geographically distributed data , the inherent errors in it , the effects of the processing algorithms used and the assumption of known interactions between variables ensuresNONMET that completely routine use by unskilled users is unlikely to be possible in the foreseeable future ; 5 .
More detailed data are requiredNONMET for particular tasks as the role of CORINE growsNONMET .
The European Commission's proposal for an environment agency ( seeNONMET above ) will subsumeNONMET the CORINE team and databases .
The global scale : NASA and GEMS/GRID Without question , the largest ‘ player ’ in the global environment arena is NASA .
The organization has initiatedNONMET many of the schemes which now are under discussion — the IGBP , for instance , has been strongly influencedNONMET by NASA proposals .
A summary of current activities and future plans is givenNONMET in NASA ( 1988b ) .
By way of example , current programmes are collectingNONMET global data on stratospheric ozone , on sea-surface and sea-ice variables and on the earth's radiation budget .
Approved future programmes includeNONMET the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite , the NASA Scatterometer and the joint NASA/CNES Ocean Topography Experiment .
In addition , however , funding has recently been approvedNONMET for a much more ambitious scheme — the Earth ObservingNONMET System ( EOS ) .
This is conceivedNONMET not as a set of hardware but as a comprehensive information system focused on the needs identifiedNONMET by the ESSC ( seeNONMET above ) and anticipatingNONMET somewhat those of IGBP .
It will collateNONMET data from the two proposed space station polar platforms , one European Space Agency platform , a Japanese one and also from the manned space station .
On this basis , a data flow of no less than 1 terabyte ( i.e. 10&sup12 ; bytes ) /day is anticipatedNONMET by the mid-1990s .
A major user of NASA data and skills has been the UN Environment Programme .
formedNONMET in the wake of the 1972 Stockholm conference , UNEPNONMET soon spawned the Global Environment Monitoring System ( GEMS ) as well as an international register of potentially toxic chemicals and a global network of sources to locateNONMET and provideNONMET technical , scientific and management information on the environment .
The need for a mechanism to handleNONMET the global environmental data was definedNONMET in the early 1980s and the Global Resources Information Database ( GRID ) resultedNONMET .
Mooneyhan ( 1988 ) has describedNONMET the progress of the pilot stage of GRID which culminatedNONMET in approval for a full operational phase ; GRID is now involved in integratingNONMET , storingNONMET and exploitingNONMET a variety of global environmental databases , mostly acquiredNONMET from NASA .
In addition to the work being carriedNONMET out in the UNEP HQ at Nairobi and in the GEMS/GRID site in Geneva , a series of GRID regional nodes are now being setNONMET up world-wide , each equippedNONMET with the same hardware and software and local subsets of the data .
The first of these is in Bangkok and another is to be openedNONMET in Latin America .
Moreover , national nodes are also being setNONMET up ; the recent IBM gift to GRID ( seeNONMET above ) has ensuredNONMET that powerful microcomputers have been installedNONMET in many African countries , together with national and continental data sets .
Training of unskilled staff to operateNONMET this equipment and to exploitNONMET the scientific data is now a major role for GRID staff .
Technical aspects and problems It followsNONMET from much of the above that there are major challenges in use of environmental data .
These are best consideredNONMET by itemizing characteristics of contemporary environmental monitoring and prediction : 1 .
The use of secondary data , rather than primary data collectedNONMET by the data analyst ; 2 .
The need , at least with data on the terrestrial environment , for an inference process to extractNONMET useful information from the secondary ( and often proxy ) data ; 3 .
The data volumes collectedNONMET are often voluminous even by the standards of contemporary computing facilities ; 4 .
The analyses carried out are often arcane in detail to all but a small group of ‘ high priests ’ ; 5 .
We have only a limited capacity for checkingNONMET the accuracy of many environmental monitoring results , let alone of predictions .
Some of these characteristics are now addressedNONMET in slightly more detail ; it will be obvious that such problems meritNONMET a paper in themselves .
Remote sensing as a data collection process As the need for more extensive , high-resolution yet consistent and up-to-date data becomesNONMET more pressing , increased use of remote sensing seemsNONMET inevitable .
No other data collection methodology obviatesNONMET the short distance variation in data sets inducedNONMET by variations in data collection and aggregation methodology typically encounteredNONMET between adjacent nation states .
The problem is now recognizedNONMET , especially in Europe , and strenuous efforts are being madeNONMET to harmoniseNONMET the data sets ( e.g. through the use of standard classifications , such as that for land use producedNONMET by the Conference of European Statisticians in 1989 ) .
At present , however , ground-collected environmental data are far less than ideal .
RecognizingNONMET this , NASA ( 1988a ) concludedNONMET that forthcoming global science projects would needNONMET land surface altitude data at three resolutions : 1 km resolution in XY and 10–100 m resolution in Z on a global basis , 100 m XY resolution and 1–10 m resolution in Z for regional databases and 10 m XY resolution and 0.1–1 m in Z for local studies .
They arguedNONMET that existing maps and digitized files from them are unable to meetNONMET these needs at global or regional scale and only remote sensing could helpNONMET in the short term : the availability of stereometric data from the French SPOT satellite has already ledNONMET to proposals for automated creation of global digital elevation models with a spatial ( XY ) resolution of about 30 m ( Muller 1989 ) .
For many terrestrial purposes , however , a substantial inference process must takeNONMET place to convertNONMET the radiometric measurements into useful information ( in contrast , more direct measurements of sea state , etc. are possible ) .
The value of this information is inherently dependent upon the quality of the inference process and that in turn dependsNONMET upon the complexity of the scene , the spatial , temporal and spectral resolution of the sensors and the particular algorithms used .
Thus far , for instance , accuracies of land cover ( let alone what is often neededNONMET , i.e. land use ) determinedNONMET from Landsat and SPOT imagery for the UK have rarely been higher than 70 per cent unless trivial classifications ( e.g. built/unbuilt land ) have been usedNONMET .
One solution to this is to ‘ densifyNONMET ’ the ground control and another is to useNONMET contextually basedNONMET classifiers rather than the traditional , spectrally basedNONMET ones .
But the ground conditions in some parts of Europe makeNONMET good results extremely difficult to obtainNONMET : some areas of Portugal , for instance , have field sizes of only a few metres and exhibit multi-level and multi-seasonal cropping .
A further difficulty is the cost of the data in relation to its anticipated benefits .
Relatively few cost/benefit studies have yet been carriedNONMET out except in such areas as crop prediction and ocean navigation ( where they are generally shownNONMET to be highly advantageous in savingNONMET someone else's money ) .
It may be that a study commissioned from contractors by the British National Space Centre will provideNONMET useful evidence on the cash value of remote sensing ; it is particularly timely in view of the appointment of Professor Pearce ( seeNONMET above ) as the adviser to the UK Secretary of State for the Environment .
Other work on assessment of costs and benefits of such data have been carriedNONMET out for the French government by Professor Didier ( 1990 ) .
Finally , since data are often costly to acquireNONMET , it followsNONMET that summaries of them e.g. The State of the European Environment report ( CEC 1988 ) and the Environmental Data Report of the UN EP ( GEMS MARC 1989 ) are of considerable value .
Equally , the ‘ signposting ’ role now being adoptedNONMET by UNEP's GRID project — which is expected to offerNONMET on-line access to a catalogue of environmental data sets and details of the responsible agencies in 1991 — is to be welcomedNONMET .
The data problem and partial solutions The lack of harmonization of definitions and methods of collection of environmental data have already been outlinedNONMET above .
In the European Community of 12 nation states , for instance , no less than eight procedures for calculatingNONMET potential evapo-transpiration have been in use !
The need for harmonization is obvious and , in this respect , must followNONMET from the successful pioneering achievements of EUROSTAT in harmonizingNONMET the definitions in trade , demographic and other ‘ social science ’ statistics ( seeNONMET CEC 1990b ) .
An additional and severe problem is that the volumes of data which are already collectedNONMET are huge by the standards of only a decade ago .
By 1995/96 , they will be very much greater , notably from the EOS programme .
NASA has announcedNONMET plans to collectNONMET up to 1 terabyte ( 10&sup12 ; bytes ) /day .
Since remote sensing data sets ( especially those pertaining to terrestrial areas of the globe ) typically needNONMET much pre-processing to calibrateNONMET , transformNONMET and then performNONMET an inference process and hence convertNONMET measurements of the radiation reflected or emittedNONMET by small areas of ground into useful ( e.g. land cover ) data , the processing power requiredNONMET is goingNONMET to be formidable .
Other , non-remote-sensing data sets are smaller in volume but more complex in structure and in their characteristics .
To holdNONMET all of the 1/50 000 scale topographic map coverage alone for the European Community would probably requireNONMET about 3 terabytes of storage .
Parenthetically , the form in which the data may be heldNONMET can affectNONMET dramatically the scale of the problem faced .
It would be technically possible , for instance , to holdNONMET in less than 1 terabyte detailed information for every individual in the world , akin to that collected about everyone in the UK through the Census of Population .
In practice , legislation generally forbidsNONMET such data being heldNONMET thus and distributedNONMET in anything other than area aggregate form ; the cross-tabulations commonly employedNONMET ( e.g. to giveNONMET tables of population numbers brokenNONMET down by age and sex ) often resultNONMET in a great multiplication of the data volumes .
This all presents major problems of data storage , handling ( especially for global data sets ) , display and dissemination .
Fortunately , technical developments have ensuredNONMET that the increase in computing power per unit cost has been growingNONMET at about an order of magnitude every 6 years over the last three decades .
Indeed , this may grossly under-representNONMET the present situation : the rapid spread of UNIX-based systems seemsNONMET to facilitateNONMET competition and , at the time of writing , performance of workstations per unit cost seemsNONMET to be increasing at about 50 per cent per annum .
Moreover , the advent of low-cost , high-density-storage devices like CD-ROMs may well makeNONMET substantial data setsNONMET available even to those with modest computing power : a CD-ROM , for instance , can holdNONMET about 600 megabytes ( i.e. 10&sup6 ; bytes ) , can be reproducedNONMET currently for about £1 and read on a device costingNONMET about £400 .
Yet , despite such revolutionary changes in technology , novel solutions will still be requiredNONMET to makeNONMET effective use of the new data sets .
One such solution is Goodchild and Yang's ( 1989 ) scheme for a hierarchical spatial data structure to handleNONMET data for the spherical earth .
A particular problem is that little or no quantitative regard has been paidNONMET until recently to the effects of quality variation in environmental data .
The literature of the last few years is throngedNONMET with papers proposingNONMET that these must be takenNONMET into account — but with few realistic proposals on how this is to be achievedNONMET .
Goodchild ( 1988 ) has madeNONMET perhaps the best summary of the problem and possible solutions to date .
Finally , relatively little emphasis has been givenNONMET to the management of data as a corporate resource , available to a wide community : many environmental data are collectedNONMET on a project-by-project basis and ‘ lost ’ once the urgency of the initial research is over .
However , the 1990 report of the Data and Facilities Working Group of the UK Inter-Agency Committee on Global Environmental Change argued strongly that planning for the dissemination and maintenance of such data was a vital role .
It also notedNONMET that ownership of and access to environmental data was a policy matter of the greatest importance ; this may be more difficult in ‘ within country ’ data than with global data since the latter are often already the subject of international exchange agreements at zero cost .
Global environmental research and the social sciences Thus far , the emphasis has been very much on the natural science aspects of environmental monitoring and prediction .
That is unremarkable since the anticipation of such problems and assessments of some of their causes and magnitudes can only be madeNONMET by environmental scientists .
Yet the consequences of any significant changes are a matter of the utmost concern to planners and to politicians at all levels , the quantification of the costs and benefits of alternative policy strategies is very much a matter for economists , and the adaptation of societies to massive change is a particular interest to sociologists and others .
For geographers — who spanNONMET the conventional ( and now archaic ) dichotomy between the natural and the environmental sciences — all of these aspects needNONMET to be wovenNONMET together to anticipateNONMET the likely spatial patterns of the effects of massive change , the redistributions in trade , health and wealth which they will bringNONMET about and the ‘ knock on ’ effects these consequences themselves will have on society and the environment .
For social scientists , then , environmental monitoring and prediction are a matter of considerable significance , especially as ‘ globalization ’ of markets and economies proceeds .
The Economic and Social Research Council ( ESRC ) commissionedNONMET two reports on global environmental change to guideNONMET or at least informNONMET the allocation of research funding .
These reports ( Pearce 1990 ; Turner 1990 ) may be takenNONMET as informed views from at least the economists in the UK social science community on the social science aspects of global environmental change .
Pearce ( 1990 ) , for instance , presentedNONMET an economist's views of the high-priority topics for research as followsNONMET : 1 .
The theory and practice of international agreements , viewed in a game theory context ; 2 .
The theory of optimal behaviour under scientific uncertainty ; , 3 .
Cost-benefit frameworks , especially for dealingNONMET with man-induced climatic effects ; 4 .
Definition of the impacts of climate change on eastern Europe and the developing countries ; 5 .
Appropriate policies on non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gases ; 6 .
Assessment of the ecological values of tropical forest ; 7 .
Economic instruments for reducing greenhouse gases ; 8 .
The international politics of climate change ; 9 .
National and global energy options givenNONMET the greenhouse effect ; 10 .
Trade and global change .
Turner ( 1990 ) arguedNONMET that the priorities are as followsNONMET : 1 .
The socio-economic consequences of sea-level rise ; 2 .
Techniques for the valuation of environmental resources and effects ; 3 .
An assessment of management tools , institutional adaptation and policy integration in regard to global environmental change ; 4 .
Studies of agriculture in relation to climate change ; 5 .
Understanding of how environmental issues and technical change interactNONMET ; 6 .
The interrelationship between environmental ethics and economics .
There is , then , no shortage of social science research which is claimedNONMET to be necessary if we are to copeNONMET with environmental change .
Some of it is being carriedNONMET out : in March 1991 ESRC announcedNONMET a £6m programme of research on Global Environmental Change .
However , perhaps most critical of all in the early stages is social science practice rather than researchNONMET .
In the USA at least , there needsNONMET to be an improvement in scientists ' understandings of how to influenceNONMET the allocation of funding for remedial measures or for further research ( seeNONMET Kitsos and AsheNONMET 1989 ) .
All too often , it seemsNONMET that the coupling of an as yet imperfect scientific understanding to policy-making is tenuous ( seeNONMET Table 9.2 ) .
Fortunately , considerable high-quality work has already begunNONMET on the legal , political and institutional aspects of global environmental change ( seeNONMET , for instance , Nitze 1990 ) .
What next ?
The contents of this chapter have scarcely touchedNONMET upon such important environmental research as the World Ocean Climate Experiment or the World Climate Research Programme .
Nor has there been any discussion of the growing requirement in the UK ( as elsewhere ) to carryNONMET out an environmental impact assessment for all major developments .
The consequences for some nations or subgroups in a population of being without access to environmental data or the tools for analysingNONMET them while others have such access are potentially profound — as the European Commission has recognizedNONMET in issuingNONMET a directive on public access to environmental data ( CEC 1990d ) — yet space limitations have also precludedNONMET their discussion .
Despite these shortcomings dictatedNONMET by the space available , what has been saidNONMET should be sufficient to illustrateNONMET the enormous and diverse scope of environmental monitoring and prediction .
Such is its diversity that measuringNONMET the total expenditure on it seemsNONMET quite impossible and the number of ‘ actors ’ already involvedNONMET is vast .
What is clear , however , is that monitoring is rarely a simple exercise , that the time-scales of the sponsors of monitoring and environmental research are rarely long term though most science is inevitably of this nature and that the increasingly multinational nature of such work necessitatesNONMET a degree of management not always present in local or nationally basedNONMET schemes .
In these circumstances , it is scarcely surprising that there is evidence of international and interdisciplinary dispute , as Terney ( 1989 ) has chronicledNONMET in regard to IGBP .
Moreover , as Newby ( 1990 ) has pointedNONMET out , the complexities of environmental research have createdNONMET a new kind of relationship between research and policy : ‘ in the past , … the relationship was predicatedNONMET on the belief that science provided decision-makers with objective ‘ hard ’ facts on which to baseNONMET their soft , value-ridden policies … .
But now we findNONMET scientists deliveringNONMET only ‘ soft ’ , uncertain ‘ facts ’ to decision-makers facingNONMET ‘ hard ’ decisions .
’ Yet , even if all of this causesNONMET great uncertainty among scientists , it is still a reasonable prediction that a decade ahead will seeNONMET both environmental monitoring and prediction treatedNONMET as an everyday need and activity in major organizations .
We shall also seeNONMET the existence of binding requirements upon national governments — certainly in the European Community — to collectNONMET at least basic environmental indicators in a harmonized form ( CEC 1990b ) .
More than that , it seemsNONMET highly likely that the social science aspects of environmental problems will underpinNONMET the actions of governments and international agencies .
Perhaps the single most important conclusion to be drawnNONMET from this review is that the monitoring , modelling and management of the global environment are tasks which uniquely requireNONMET the integration of skills and techniques from many disciplines .
BuildingNONMET such research teams is essential .
UnderlyingNONMET it all , however , is one obvious fact : that the gathering and analysis of geographically distributed environmental data formNONMET the necessary starting-point for ensuringNONMET the success of our future on earth .
Acknowledgements Thanks are due to Tina Buckle and Jonathan Raper for remasteringNONMET the diagrams .
The UK ESRC supportedNONMET the work of the South East Regional Research Laboratory in Birkbeck College , University of London , from which this review has grownNONMET .
Managing natural and technological hazards Anthony C. Gatrell and Peter Vincent Introduction Few areas of the application of GIS technology can be as socially significant , or environmentally relevant , as the management of emergencies and disasters due to natural and technological hazards .
Whether attemptingNONMET to constructNONMET a database of resources for use in planning responses to nuclear emergencies , developing optimal routes for schedulingNONMET the safe transport of hazardous substances , or monitoringNONMET the health implications of a disaster , GIS can assistNONMET in identifying possibilities and formulatingNONMET solutions .
The 1990s have been declaredNONMET the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction .
LetNONMET us hopeNONMET that G1S can , in some small way , help mitigateNONMET the suffering and hardship felt by all those afflictedNONMET by the effects of hazards which , as we have learntNONMET with bitter recent experience in the UK , can occurNONMET in an untimely fashion in the most improbable of places .
Research on hazards is multidisciplinary and straddlesNONMET the social , environmental and mathematical sciences .
If , for instance , we wishNONMET to modelNONMET the dispersal of a plume of toxic gas resultingNONMET from a chemical explosion , assessNONMET its possible impact on human health and evaluateNONMET likely evacuation scenarios of the population at risk we would requireNONMET , for example , a knowledge of atmospheric dispersion models , epidemiology and population distribution .
Some researchers suggestNONMET that hazards ( and emergencies that might resultNONMET ) can be regardedNONMET as either natural or technological .
We shall elaborateNONMET on this simple division below but suggestNONMET here that the wealth of literature on the former ( seeNONMET , for instance , Burton et al. 1978 and Perry 1981 ) has yet to be matchedNONMET by a similar volume of work on the latter .
There are signs that this imbalance is being rectifiedNONMET ( Zeigler et al. 1983 ) .
Hazard research , like few other GIS application areas , is not only stretchingNONMET the present technology to its limits but is a quite remarkable focus of international effort into several important research-related areas such as expert systems and simulation studies .
In this sense the scene is clearly one of hazard problems lookingNONMET for improved GIS rather than for GIS lookingNONMET for good problems , as is all too often the case .
Hazard research What are hazards ?
Formally , a hazard can be definedNONMET as : ‘ a physical situation with a potential for human injury , damage to property , damage to the environment , or some combination of these ’ ( Health and Safety Executive 1989 : 30 ) .
A hazard is a threat which , givenNONMET a set of circumstances , may becomeNONMET translated into a realized event .
What we chooseNONMET to callNONMET this event dependsNONMET upon factors such as its magnitude : we speakNONMET for instance of accidents , emergencies , disasters and catastrophes , each of which carriesNONMET connotations concerning the scale of the event and each of which will have a set of human and/or environmental consequences .
On 30 March 1956 one of the most powerful volcanic disturbances this century , the Bezymianny eruption , occurredNONMET .
Few people noticedNONMET the event as it tookNONMET place in an uninhabited part of Kamchatcka and causedNONMET no known casualties .
In contrast , the extrusion of a small volume of lava from a secondary cone on the slopes of Tristan da Cunha becameNONMET the focus of global interest when , during October 1961 , the island's lobster processing plant was smotheredNONMET and the 300 people of the island's only settlement were evacuatedNONMET to the UK .
These two contrasting events emphasizeNONMET the central fact that even natural hazards are not definedNONMET solely by the characteristics of the event but by the interaction of those events with the human occupation of the threatened area .
As notedNONMET above , the simple division of hazards is between those which are natural and those which are technological or human-induced .
Each of these may be further subdivided and the typology shownNONMET in Fig. 10.1 draws upon the classic work of Burton and Kates ( 1964 ) in separating geophysical from biological hazards and Zeigler et al. ( 1983 ) in distinguishing public ( or what we might callNONMET societal ) hazards from private ( individual ) ones .
The further subdivision of natural hazards is self-explanatory as is that of individual technological hazards .
Zeigler dividesNONMET the public hazards into those which result from the production of raw materials and manufactured goods , those which originateNONMET in transport and transmission and those which threatenNONMET the public in their role as consumers .
The United Nations Disaster Relief Organization ( UNDRO ) has producedNONMET a classification of disasters , derived on the basis of case data ( Table 10.1 ) .
UNDRO recognizesNONMET three basic types of disaster : accidents , natural events , and other disasters .
The differentiation of accidents from other types is useful in the context of emergency planning and is not so clearly conveyedNONMET by other hazard typologies .
However , the temptation in all classification exercises is to produceNONMET partitional schemes and this should really be resistedNONMET here .
It is more useful ( Johnson 1983 ) to adoptNONMET a non-partitional scheme ( fig. 10.1 ) that recognizesNONMET , for instance , food poisoning as both a personal and consumer hazard , or lead pollution ( e.g. from car exhausts ) as both a meteorological event and technological hazard ( both public and private ) .
An air crash ( as at Lockerbie ) affectsNONMET an entire community directly , as well as being an occupational hazard and risk to the individual traveller .
Hillslope failure ( as at Aberfan in South Wales in 1966 ) is a geomorphic hazard but may ariseNONMET because of raw material extraction .
Dutch elm disease is a floral hazard but is exacerbatedNONMET by the transport of infected logs .
Hohensemer et al. ( 1983 ) makeNONMET the important point that hazards are multidimensional in nature and suggestNONMET 12 dimensions along which any hazard may be scoredNONMET ( seeNONMET Table 10.2 ) .
These factors will , of course , be important in decidingNONMET on the role that GIS can playNONMET in hazard monitoring and emergency planning .
For instance , some events will persistNONMET briefly , have immediate consequences , minor transgenerational effects and have little or no potential for non-human mortality ( an air crash is an example ) .
Others , such as a chemical explosion involvingNONMET the release of a toxic gas , may persistNONMET for a week or more , have delayedNONMET consequences , may affectNONMET a future generation if the toxic chemical is mutagenic and may have a significant impact on plant and animal populations .
There may be more scope for a GIS approach in the latter than in the former situations .
The Hohensemer scheme is not , however , beyond criticism .
for example , can hazards really be thoughtNONMET of as having any intentionality ?
Industrial hazards and risk assessment Once hazards have been identifiedNONMET there may followNONMET efforts to assessNONMET the hazard risk .
By ‘ risk ’ we understandNONMET ‘ the likelihood of a specified undesired event occurringNONMET within a specified period or in specified circumstances ’ ( Health and Safety Executive 1989 : 30 ) .
It may , of course , be easier to quantifyNONMET risk for natural hazards because of historical records and statistical estimation of recurrence intervals .
Technological hazards are more unpredictable and may be extremely rare , so that it becomesNONMET difficult to useNONMET probability concepts to quantifyNONMET risk , especially those which relyNONMET on notions of relative frequency .
The identification of chemical hazards requiresNONMET that the locations of sites be knownNONMET , together with the dangerous substances stored or processed there .
In the UK ( seeNONMET Petts 1988 for a splendid overview ) the Health and Safety Executive must be notifiedNONMET of sites where hazardous substances in excess of threshold limits are handledNONMET .
Such substances and thresholds includeNONMET , for instance , 25 tonnes of flammable liquid petroleum gas and the explosive sodium chlorate , and 10 tonnes of toxic chlorine gas .
Some 1600 installations are notifiable , along with thousands of kilometres of pipelines ( mostly high-pressure natural gas transmission lines ) .
FollowingNONMET a number of major accidents involvingNONMET industrial activities ( including those at Flixborough , Humberside in 1974 ; Beek , the Netherlands in 1975 ; and Seveso and Manfredonia in Italy in 1976 ) , the EC issuedNONMET a Directive on Major Accident Hazards .
The Directive , which is commonly referredNONMET to as the ‘ Seveso ’ Directive , was issuedNONMET in June 1982 and in the UK its requirements were embodiedNONMET in the Control of Major Accident Hazard ( CIMAH ) Regulations ( 1984 ) .
Among other things , these regulations requireNONMET operators of hazardous installations to drawNONMET up on-site and off-site emergency plans and to giveNONMET information to members of the public who liveNONMET or work near such installations ( Houston 1987 ) .
There are presently about 300 CIMAH sites .
However , many potentially hazardous chemical installations are not coveredNONMET by such regulations .
Clearly , a plant which storesNONMET 1 tonne less than is requiredNONMET for notification slips through the net , while large numbers of handling sites ( warehouses , for instance ) are not coveredNONMET .
The regulations have obvious implications for G1S work , as illustratedNONMET below .
In Halton Borough , Cheshire , for instance , there are 13 notifiable installations , with over 20 000 people livingNONMET within the defined ‘ consultation zones ’ ( PettsNONMET 1988 ) .
It is also relevant to pointNONMET out here the work of the Health and Safety Executive in developing techniques for quantitative risk assessment ( Health and Safety Executive 1989 ) .
Such techniques includeNONMET the use of a ‘ risk assessment tool ’ ( RISKAT ) , inputs to which includeNONMET data on wind direction and speed ; the output of which is a map of calculated risk contours .
In societal risk assessment ‘ it is also necessary to inputNONMET data on the distribution of population around the installation .
This can be a difficult and time-consuming process , and inevitably some simplifying assumptions are neededNONMET ’ ( Health and Safety Executive 1989 : 17 ) .
Again , the G1S implications are clear and are discussedNONMET below .
Hazardous waste disposal The disposal of both nuclear and non-nuclear wastes has provedNONMET to be of major public concern in recent years .
The rather clumsy handling by NIREX of the search for sites to storeNONMET low- and intermediate-level wastes , together with very recent worries about the import of toxic wastes such as polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) , are but two examples of such concern in the UK .
However , while the former has been givenNONMET considerable attention by geographers ( summarizedNONMET by Openshaw et al. 1989 ) there has been relatively little such work in the UK on the disposal of non-nuclear wastes .
This contrastsNONMET with the situation in the USA ( Greenberg and Anderson 1984 ) , where the clean-up of abandoned sites is a priority .
Certainly , in terms of the volume of waste generated in the UK non-nuclear hazardous industrial wastes should be high on the environmental agenda ; while less than 1 million tonnes of all nuclear wastes were generatedNONMET in 1985–86 , 10 times that amount were generatedNONMET of hazardous wastes ( Openshaw et al. 1989 : 13 ) .
Attention should be drawnNONMET to the three Annual Reports of the Hazardous Waste Inspectorate ( now merged with other branches of the DoE to formNONMET Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution ) .
These containNONMET some valuable material on disposal practices , and volumes of waste generated and disposed of by each waste regulation authority ( WRA ) — counties in England , districts in Wales , Scotland and Northern Ireland .
Each WRA is requiredNONMET to produceNONMET a waste disposal plan and these are startingNONMET to appearNONMET .
They too containNONMET useful material on , for instance , the locations of sites , though individual site licences must be consultedNONMET for details of what each is permittedNONMET to takeNONMET in the way of hazardous wastes .
What is not knownNONMET is information on the locations of former sites , at which quite toxic materials may have been dumpedNONMET , though recent work by Egger ( 1989 ) in Austria has mappedNONMET a vast number of such sites .
It is these , rather than existing , licensed sites which should be a focus of research activity , particularly when examiningNONMET possible links to ill health .
We simply do not have enough evidence yet to backNONMET up the claim that ‘ people are almost certainly ill , dead , or dying because of these sloppy waste disposal activities ’ ( Openshaw et al. 1989 : 12 ) .
Research is in progress , however , to assessNONMET possible health effects of poor incineration ( Diggle et al. 1990 ) .
Particular attention should be focusedNONMET on hospital incinerators , since these have been subject to Crown immunity for many years and most are technically ill-equipped to burnNONMET at sufficiently high temperatures for adequate disposal of wastes ( Gatrell and Lovett 1991 ) .
We needNONMET to produceNONMET an inventory of all such sites , together with a publicly available , comprehensive database on all sites acceptingNONMET hazardous industrial wastes .
Emergency planning It is convenient to retainNONMET the nuclear/non-nuclear distinction when discussingNONMET the background to emergency planning .
Nuclear emergency planning in the UK has been reviewedNONMET by Matthews and Pepper ( 1981 ) .
Nuclear power stations must prepareNONMET a plan and submitNONMET this to the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate and Health and Safety Executive for approval .
Evacuation plans are requiredNONMET to coverNONMET an area within a distance of 2.4 km ; these detailNONMET the roles to be playedNONMET by the emergency services .
The very narrow emergency planning zones contrast with those in the USA ( Collins 1981 ) , where planning is requiredNONMET up to 16 km from the site to coverNONMET exposure to radiation plumes .
Local authorities in the UK that have declaredNONMET themselves ‘ nuclear-free ’ have been highly critical of British planning , callingNONMET for an extension of emergency zones to at least 24 km .
Zeigler et al. ( 1983 ) should be consultedNONMET for material relatingNONMET to evacuation behaviour in the wake of the incident at Three Mile Island .
In the UK little work of any description seemsNONMET to have been done on human behaviour in the aftermath of releases of hazardous substances , nor is much available on public attitudes to emergency planning .
Indeed , no major studies of evacuation due to hazards have been undertakenNONMET in recent times and this is a widely recognized deficiency which no research funding body seemsNONMET willing to rectifyNONMET .
In the USA on the other hand , a good deal of useful research in these areas has been undertakenNONMET .
This research is broughtNONMET together in very useful reports producedNONMET by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory , Tennessee ( Sorenson et al. 1987 ; Vogt and Sorenson 1987 ) and the Disaster Research Centre , University of Delaware .
Perry ( 1985 ) has writtenNONMET an interesting book on emergency planning and evacuation , coveringNONMET both natural and technological hazards .
For him , comprehensive emergency planning and management involveNONMET : prevention , protection , response and restoration .
By prevention we understandNONMET the elimination or reduction in risk , perhaps by adequate zoning or safe routeing of shipments , for instance .
IncludedNONMET in protection are methods for detectingNONMET likely hazard events and in warningNONMET those likely to be affectedNONMET .
Response includesNONMET search and rescue ( including the need to copeNONMET with secondary threats such as contamination of water supplies after an explosion , or fire followingNONMET an earthquake ) .
As Perry and others have notedNONMET , relatively few resources are devoted to the first two aspects , the bulk goingNONMET to response and restoration ( rebuilding ) .
It should be clear from this brief description that these issues are inherently geographical .
In one of the few studies of evacuation behaviour after a non-nuclear hazard event Liverman and Wilson ( 1981 ) giveNONMET weight to this argument .
In 1979 a train carryingNONMET chlorine , liquid petroleum , toluene and propane was derailedNONMET in Mississauga , Ontario , causingNONMET a series of explosions .
This ledNONMET to the evacuation of 250 000 people which , although staggeredNONMET over several days , ledNONMET to great pressure on transport arteries .
An important finding was that many relied on their own transport and wentNONMET to stayNONMET with friends and relatives some distance away , rather than relyingNONMET on the 19 official evacuation reception centres .
Despite this , the evacuation was successful , partly because the accident occurredNONMET at a weekend and the immediately affected area was sparsely populatedNONMET .
In addition , the police were well prepared , stimulatedNONMET largely by implementingNONMET a plan designed more to copeNONMET with an emergency at the nearby Toronto International Airport than for the event in question .
It is not without interest to noteNONMET that in the USA there is a Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) , established in 1978 , charged with dealingNONMET with all types of emergency planning and management .
In the UK there is no equivalent , though the spate of disasters in the past 4 years ( involvingNONMET over 1000 lives lostNONMET ) has ledNONMET to several calls for such a national body to be establishedNONMET .
Natural hazards In this short space it is not possible to goNONMET into any depth on the nature of particular natural hazards but only to highlightNONMET those aspects relevant to GIS .
Needless to sayNONMET , the study of natural hazards is important , a statement brought into sharp focus by the fact that natural hazards accountNONMET for up to 4 per cent of total deaths in the world each year ( Mitchell , 1974 ) .
In 1970 , for example , more than 200 000 people diedNONMET in the cyclone and flooding of Bangladesh and in 1979 the hurricanes David and Frederick causedNONMET more than $3bn damage in the USA .
Shah ( 1983 ) madeNONMET a comprehensive investigation of natural disaster reports for the period 1974–80 and concludedNONMET that both disaster frequency and magnitude ( measuredNONMET in terms of lives lostNONMET ) are increasing .
High death tolls are still a characteristic of less developed , low-income countries .
Surprisingly , fog is the third most important hazard in Europe after floods and volcanoes .
Research on natural hazards has a long tradition in geography goingNONMET back more than half a century .
Much of the impetus for such research aroseNONMET in the USA from observations on river basin management and the need to reduceNONMET flood damage .
The vast majority of natural hazards studies have ignoredNONMET the physical nature of the events per se and have concentratedNONMET on behavioural issues such as the perception and estimation of hazards .
This emphasis is partly due to the background of the researchers involvedNONMET ( many are human geographers and sociologists ) and partly because it is only really since the Second World War that major hazards have been monitoredNONMET systematically , culminatingNONMET , of course , in the last decade or so in the use of satellite technology .
Brief reference to two examples of natural hazards may illustrateNONMET the potential relevance of a GIS approach , applications of which are consideredNONMET below .
Jones et al. ( 1989 ) have examinedNONMET the distribution of some 8500 landslides in the UK .
Their maps showNONMET clearly an increased propensity for landslidingNONMET in the north and west of the UK .
More to the point , however , is the fact that this distribution can be modelledNONMET in terms of slopes , rainfall , rock types and so on .
In other words the actual hazard distribution can be understoodNONMET and areas at risk identifiedNONMET .
The potential benefits to insurance companies , engineers and planners are clear .
Second , a well-known winter hazard in the UK , with marked spatial localization , is fog .
Predictive models of its distribution have clear implications for road and air safety .
Perry ( 1981 ) describesNONMET a fog potential index that is a function of local topography , environmental features affectingNONMET fog formation and distance from standing water bodies .
Reliance is currently placedNONMET on a network of monitoring stations , often sparsely locatedNONMET and frequently outside fog-prone areas ; GIS could implementNONMET a predictive model basedNONMET on digitized map features and indeed the model could also be usedNONMET in site allocation studies for airports and the like .
The majority of natural hazard research has focusedNONMET on single hazards but of course any area may be prone to more than one hazard type .
This idea ledNONMET Hewitt and Burton ( 1971 ) to developNONMET the concept of ‘ all-hazards-at-a-place ’ .
To achieveNONMET this they concentratedNONMET on the whole spectrum of damaging events in an area and exploredNONMET their aggregate impact .
The implications for GIS in the development of ‘ hazardousness ’ indices are obvious and if time-series data are available there is the potential to produceNONMET a variety of probability maps .
The collection of historical data on natural hazards is important since it is clear that their spatial pattern variesNONMET through time .
Many areas that appearNONMET to be hazard-free on current maps may merely by passingNONMET through a temporary period of quiescence .
This is perhaps best illustratedNONMET with reference to earthquakes .
For example , in 1692 , the whole of southern England was affectedNONMET by an earthquake whose epicentre was locatedNONMET in what is now Belgium ; a good deal of minor structural damage was inflictedNONMET ( Morse 1983 ) .
Presumably the builders of the Channel Tunnel are aware of this ?
Environmental epidemiology This is , of course , a vast subject area , embracingNONMET the impact of the natural and technological environments on human health .
It coversNONMET , for instance , the associations between water and air pollution and ill health , links between geological and pedological environments and ill health , as well as associations between specific technological hazards ( e.g. high-voltage power lines ) and possible health effects .
We can only considerNONMET a small fraction of this work here ; little consideration is givenNONMET to occupational environments , for instance .
In the UK such research is widespread though there are specialist environmental epidemiology research institutes at Southampton and Cardiff ( fundedNONMET by the Medical Research Council ) , and others at the University of Surrey ( Robens Institute ) and at the London School for Hygiene and Tropical Medicine .
The latter houses the Small Area Health Statistics Research Unit ( SAHSRU ) , which has a specific remit to conductNONMET research into morbidity and mortality at local scales ( Elliot 1988 ) .
The SAHSRU liaisesNONMET closely with OPCS .
The kinds of databases usedNONMET by these groups are discussedNONMET below .
Greenberg ( 1983 ) and a collection of papers in Greenberg ( 1987 ) reviewNONMET some of the literature on environmental epidemiology .
It seemsNONMET worth statingNONMET at the outset that there are two ways geographical research in this general area can proceedNONMET .
One is to collectNONMET morbidity and mortality data ( usually the latter is more widely available , though the former more useful ) and to examineNONMET spatial distributions for clustering .
This has itself generatedNONMET a substantial literature ( seeNONMET the papers in Elliot 1988 for an overview ) and is nowhere better exemplifiedNONMET than in Openshaw's geographical analysis machine ( seeNONMET Ch. 2 ) .
We then search retrospectively for evidence of possible environmental associations .
An alternative approach is to beginNONMET by hypothesizingNONMET an environmental determinant of ill health and to collectNONMET data to testNONMET an explicit hypothesis .
If an association is suggestedNONMET then we would wantNONMET to collectNONMET data in other areas to assessNONMET the hypothesis further .
Of course , these two approaches are not clear-cut in practice ; in many cases the hypotheses of interest will have themselves been generatedNONMET by inductive mapping .
One example of an hypothesis which has been givenNONMET serious attention in recent years is the possible link between electromagnetic fields generatedNONMET by high-voltage power lines or supply cables and ill health .
Some work ( Perry et al. 1981 ) suggestedNONMET associations with mental illness and suicide , while others ( e.g. Wertheimer and Leeper 1982 ) have examinedNONMET links to various cancers , including leukaemias .
A good bibliography is providedNONMET in Perry and Pearl ( 1988 ) .
The Central Electricity Generating Board ( now privatized and split into two companies ) is fundingNONMET a large-scale , 2-year project to assessNONMET links to childhood cancer , while another recently announced study aimsNONMET to lookNONMET at links to sudden infant death .
One obvious problem , with implications for any GIS input , is that the effects are highly localizedNONMET , with little measurable field effect more than a few dozen metres away from the route centre-lines .
Accuracy of digital data collection ( either of the power lines or residential locations ) is paramount .
There seemsNONMET to be a growing interest in examining associations between ill health and the geological environment .
GIS workNONMET in this field ( e.g. Matthews 1989 ) is reviewedNONMET later , but we noteNONMET here the work of the applied geochemistry group at Imperial College ( responsible for a series of atlases on regional geochemistry ) and the existence of a Society for Environmental Geochemistry and Health .
One area of recent debate concernsNONMET radon gas and its links to lung cancer .
This is takenNONMET very seriously in the USA , where the Environmental Protection Agency estimatesNONMET that 10 000–20 000 deaths from lung cancer each year are due to radon gas exposure .
Estimates from Scandinavia suggestNONMET that 10–30 per cent of such deaths are causedNONMET by exposure to radon ( Richardson 1988 : 270–81 ) .
The gas is trappedNONMET in well-insulated houses and is producedNONMET by the decay of uranium in rocks and soil ; thus it has been measuredNONMET at high concentrations in parts of Cornwall and Devon .
There are great difficulties in assessingNONMET health effects , however , since exposure variesNONMET greatly from house to house within small neighbourhoods .
Carefully designedNONMET case-control studies are therefore requiredNONMET to measure the separate effect of radon exposure after controllingNONMET for smoking behaviour and other risk factors .
Other health concerns which might meritNONMET attention by those involved in the Regional Research Laboratory ( RRL ) initiative includeNONMET air and water pollution .
The debate about lead pollution from vehicle exhaust emissions is well knownNONMET ; less publicity has been givenNONMET to PAHs ( polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons ) , a ubiquitious product of combustion processes and knownNONMET to be carcinogenic ( Lioy and Daisey 1987 ) .
Research at the North West Regional Research Laboratory ( NWRRL ) aimsNONMET to createNONMET buffers around busy roads and junctions and to useNONMET data from the Cancer Registry to examineNONMET possible links between proximity to such sources of pollution and prevalence of lung cancer .
Those with an interest in health and air pollution should noteNONMET the availability of a very detailed database from the Warren Springs Laboratory , containingNONMET details of smoke and sulphur dioxide emissions at a large number of sites in the UK .
The possible link between nitrates in water and stomach cancer is the subject of much debate ( Beresford 1985 ) , as is the association between aluminium content and Alzheimer's disease .
The problems of assessingNONMET such links are , of course , huge , but there is scope for a contribution .
The role of GIS in hazard management scenarios — examples As we have already impliedNONMET , GIS has a role to playNONMET in all aspects of hazard research , from hazard monitoring , risk assessment and emergency planning to copingNONMET with an event and evaluatingNONMET its consequences .
The examples describedNONMET below illustrateNONMET all these , though as yet there do not appearNONMET to be many instances of disasters in the management of which GIS has playedNONMET a significant part .
Technological hazards , emergency planning and GIS A considerable amount of research has been undertakenNONMET to applyNONMET GIS methods to evacuation scenarios around hazardous sites .
Much of this research has concentratedNONMET on network analysis of the road system .
Reference was madeNONMET above to so-called CIMAH sites , major hazardous installations for which on-site and off-site emergency plans must be preparedNONMET .
Early research at the NWRRL focusedNONMET on developingNONMET a GIS for use by the police and county emergency planning officers in Cumbria that would aidNONMET in the management of a possible explosion at a chemical factory in Whitehaven , west Cumbria ( Vincent et al. 1988 ; Dunn 1989 ) .
The police requiredNONMET a portable system that could be implementedNONMET on an IBM-compatible microcomputer .
This was writtenNONMET at the NWRRL usingNONMET FORTRAN 77 and the Graphical Kernel System .
The GIS is menu-based and is exceptionally user-friendly ( Pl. 10.1 ) .
It opensNONMET with an outline map and the superimposition of the rather rigid zones usedNONMET by the emergency planners .
Full zoom facilities are available at any stage .
In any emergency it is of course vital to have high-quality data on the distribution of population and resources .
The system incorporatesNONMET digitized data on the distribution of all domestic and non-domestic properties in the town together with digitized road centre-line data .
Both sets of data were providedNONMET by Pinpoint Analysis Ltd , who are undertakingNONMET this digitizing task for the entire country .
Other spatially referenced data incorporatedNONMET into the system includeNONMET those on the distribution of schools , medical and transport services which can be displayedNONMET and supplementary information about them obtained .
The GIS permitsNONMET population estimatesNONMET to be madeNONMET for any arbitrary rectangular region on the map .
Most significantly , it incorporatesNONMET a shortest path algorithm which usesNONMET the road network to findNONMET optimal routes between user-defined start and end nodes .
Although predatingNONMET the RRL initiative by several years — and , indeed the emergence of GIS as a major research area — we should remindNONMET ourselves of Openshaw's work on appraisingNONMET nuclear reactor sites .
UsingNONMET what would now be calledNONMET GIS skills , Openshaw ( 1980 ) examinedNONMET over 13 000 1 km grid squares in the UK which intersectNONMET the coastline and relatedNONMET these to data from the 1971 Census ( which were madeNONMET available for such grid squares ) .
He demonstratedNONMET that there is an abundance of ‘ remote ’ sites , in contrast to the official view that such sites were increasingly hard to findNONMET .
He suggestedNONMET that in early spatial searches for sites ‘ only a small number were ever identifiedNONMET in the first place because rigorous searches could not be performedNONMET by manual means with poor quality data ’ ( Openshaw 1980 : 289 ) .
Heywood and Cornelius ( 1989 ) have shownNONMET how GIS can be usedNONMET for monitoringNONMET possible radiation releases and thus the relevance of GIS in nuclear emergency planning and monitoring .
They proposeNONMET a national radiological spatial information system and , in a pilot project in Cumbria , have integratedNONMET several layers of data within ARC/INFO to showNONMET what this might involveNONMET ( Fig. 10.2 ) .
Such data includeNONMET those from the Population and Agricultural Censuses as well as point data from rain gauge sites and radiation monitoring stations .
As an example , the system is usedNONMET to determineNONMET restriction zones for the movement of sheep after the explosion at Chernobyl in 1986 .
This is done by finding areas of high rainfall and parishes with high sheep populations .
The map overlay of point and area information showsNONMET generally good agreement with the restriction zones imposedNONMET by the Ministry of Agriculture , Fisheries and Food , with the exception of a small area to the south-east of Cumbria , borderingNONMET on Lancashire .
The British government carriedNONMET out a review of its arrangements for handlingNONMET nuclear accidents overseas followingNONMET the Chernobyl accident .
The DoE , through Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution ( HMIP ) , was givenNONMET the task of co-ordinatingNONMET a national response plan , installingNONMET the radiation monitoring network and acting as lead government department in an emergency ( HMSO 1988 ) .
The monitoring network has becomeNONMET knownNONMET as the radioactive incident monitoring network ( RIMNET ) and has , as its prime responsibility , the detection of abnormal increases in radiation levels within the UK of the kind that might ariseNONMET from an overseas nuclear accident .
The full implementation of the RIMNET system will takeNONMET some time .
By the end of 1988 gamma radiation dose monitors had been installedNONMET at 46 meteorological stations as part of phase 1 of the development programme .
Radiation readings are takenNONMET every hour at each station and are transmittedNONMET to a central computer which analysesNONMET the data .
The current criterion for alert is two readings of more than three times normal background , either successively at the same site or simultaneously at two adjacent sites .
The dissemination of information in the event of an incident is dealtNONMET with at three levels : the first is the normal system of press notices ; the second is the use of teletext and viewdata ( Ceefax and Prestel ) to getNONMET direct to members of the public at their homes or places of work ; the third is the use of Telecom Gold electronic mail to getNONMET more technical details to various official bodies , such as water authorities ( Jackson 1989 ) .
Phase 2 of the RIMNET scheme will be completedNONMET by the end of 1991 when between 80 and 90 monitoring sites will have been establishedNONMET .
GivenNONMET very wide regional and local variations in deposition , questions must be raisedNONMET about the effectiveness of such a small network ; local authorities will needNONMET to supplementNONMET it with their own networks .
There are important analytical problems to be addressedNONMET concerning the siting of such monitoring equipment and these are elaboratedNONMET on later .
Abroad , Kaspar ( 1981 ) has discussedNONMET a computer-based exercise , with GIS overtones , involvingNONMET the simulated evacuation of the population living in the vicinity of the Neckarwestheim nuclear power plant in Baden Württemberg .
In the scenario he outlinesNONMET , an area affectedNONMET by radioactive releases is determined , the population within that area is allocatedNONMET to reception areas ( with capacity constraints ) , evacuation routes are identifiedNONMET and traffic restrictions implementedNONMET .
Little detail is providedNONMET , however , and it is thus difficult to evaluateNONMET his work fully .
Dangermond ( 1985 ) describesNONMET the use of the ARC/INFO NETWORK module for use in emergency planning situations .
He describesNONMET how a road network is digitized and subsequently analysed usingNONMET allocation , districtingNONMET and routeing algorithms .
Allocation determinesNONMET which arcs in the network will be allocatedNONMET to a particular node or centre ; districting makesNONMET it possible to outlineNONMET rapidly sets of polygons in order to defineNONMET specific areas of interest ( districts ) and to summarizeNONMET their characteristics ; routeing providesNONMET a minimum path algorithm through the network , the arcs of which can be assignedNONMET weights according to road conditions , road capacity and so on .
Dangermond givesNONMET several examples in his paper including the use of NETWORK for the allocation of emergency vehicles , optimum routeing of fire engines from garages to the accident scene and the movement of spills through sewers and river networks .
When combinedNONMET with the other facilities in ARC/INFO , quite complex disaster management scenarios can be handledNONMET .
For example , earthquake fault zones can be combinedNONMET with data on housing density and structural details to predictNONMET earthquake damage levels and these data then related to the network model .
Vincent ( 1989 ) illustratesNONMET the use of ARC/INFO and its NETWORK module for findingNONMET safe routes for chlorine transhipment on the road and rail systems of north-west England ( Pl. 10.2 ) .
In this case , population density data for a 1 km buffer on either side of network arcs were overlaidNONMET on the network itself so as to actNONMET as weights for the minimum path algorithm .
Chosen routes were those which minimizedNONMET population rather than distance .
Hazardous waste disposal There can be little doubt that a GIS approach has wide applicability in all sorts of location problems where the goal is to minimizeNONMET ( rather than , as conventionally , maximizeNONMET ) accessibility to a population .
A particularly good application is to the search for potential sites for the disposal of nuclear and non-nuclear ( but none the less hazardous ) wastes .
We discussNONMET here some relevant work on the siting of facilities for the disposal of nuclear wastes before examiningNONMET those for non-nuclear wastes .
The major contribution to informed debate about the search for sites for the disposal of nuclear wastes has comeNONMET from a group of geographers ( Openshaw et al. 1989 ) and a GIS approach to this problem can payNONMET high dividends .
The work of Carver ( seeNONMET Openshaw et al. 1989 : Ch. 7 ) is an interesting example .
One advantage is the ability to modelNONMET a range of alternatives by allowingNONMET particular criteria to enterNONMET or be omittedNONMET from the polygon overlay operation .
Conceptually , what is offeredNONMET is little more than an automated ‘ sieve mapping ’ that land-use planners have usedNONMET for many years , but the whole procedure is speededNONMET up by many orders of magnitude usingNONMET GIS software .
The authors examineNONMET both near-surface sites and deep repositories ( which useNONMET more restricted population criteria and allowNONMET offshore locations to enterNONMET ) .
Data layers includeNONMET geological maps , conservation areas , transport routes , petrochemical facilities and demographic data .
As different layers are addedNONMET sequentially we seeNONMET how the proportion of available land shrinks ( Pl. 10.3 ) ; for instance , when geological criteria are setNONMET in the search for a deep repository , 25 per cent of land area remainsNONMET and the addition of the population density layer reducesNONMET this to 24 per cent .
However , addingNONMET a proximity to transportNONMET constraint lowersNONMET this to 12 per cent ; and so on .
We can not pretendNONMET GIS is a solution to the political problems of negotiation and justification but at the very least the openness of the procedures goesNONMET some way towards satisfyingNONMET a worried public .
GIS research into site selection for non-nuclear hazardous waste has been almost exclusively conductedNONMET in North America and has yet to be matchedNONMET in the UK .
Jensen and Christiansen ( 1986 ) , workingNONMET in the south-eastern USA , useNONMET a raster approach ( with a pixel resolution of 20 m&sup2 ; ) and Boolean overlay to ‘ weedNONMET out ’ particular sites , such as those which are poorly drained , environmentally sensitive or inaccessible ( seeNONMET also Stewart 1987 ) .
Environmental monitoring of sites for the disposal of toxic waste is of particular concern in the USA .
The Comprehensive Environmental Response , Compensation and Liability Act ( CERCLA ) legislation of 1980 ( ‘ Superfund ’ ) requiresNONMET the cleaning up of the worst landfill sites , of which some 800 had been identifiedNONMET by the Environmental Protection Agency by 1986 ( Foresman 1986 ) .
A major worry has been the threat posedNONMET by groundwater pollution and some research has been conductedNONMET on usingNONMET GIS to monitorNONMET this ( Merchant et al. 1987 ; Barringer et al. 1987 ; von Braun 1988 ) .
This is an important topic since 95 per cent of rural households in the USA consumeNONMET only groundwater , while half the US population consumesNONMET at least some groundwater ( Merchant et al. 1987 ) .
Clearly , the research demands access to exceptionally good environmental data , usually in three dimensions .
As Foresman ( 1986 ) suggestsNONMET , we might expectNONMET remote sensing technology to playNONMET a major role .
Merchant et al. ( 1987 ) for example , useNONMET the image processing system ERDAS to constructNONMET an index of vulnerability to groundwater pollution ; this usesNONMET variables such as depth to water table , soil type , slope and so on ( seeNONMET Estes et al. 1987 for a similar approach ) .
Barringer et al. ( 1987 ) overlayNONMET data on soil type and geology with that of groundwater quality ( hardness and corrosivity measures ) and buildNONMET a linear model which showsNONMET that the background environmental variables are good predictors of the water quality indices .
Again , a raster-based approach is used .
A further example is work by von Braun ( 1988 ) who usesNONMET pMAP to lookNONMET at exposure of organic and metallic compounds in groundwater in the vicinity of Tucson airport , Arizona .
UsingNONMET plume models that predictNONMET the movement of contaminants she is able to intersectNONMET the results with data on current well locations and to assessNONMET which water supply areas are worst contaminatedNONMET .
OverlayingNONMET the results with residential location data providesNONMET ‘ maps delineatingNONMET location-specific exposures for each residence in each time-period ’ ( von Braun 1988 ; 1160 ) .
In principle , it is then possible to compareNONMET such ‘ doses ’ with epidemiological data , once again indicatingNONMET a link from a hazard event to assessment of health outcomes .
Attention should be drawnNONMET to Foresman's comment that the US Geological Survey ( USGS ) ( at the EROS Data Centre ) have successfully linkedNONMET ARC/INFO to a model of groundwater flow ( Foresman 1986 : 260 ) .
This kind of link between GIS and other modelling programs is to be warmly welcomedNONMET and parallels work at the NWRRL in linkingNONMET GIS and air pollution plume models .
Natural hazards and disaster management Several studies in recent papers have shownNONMET the effectiveness of GIS in mitigatingNONMET the effects of major natural hazards .
Berke and Ruch ( 1985 ) , for example , describeNONMET a GIS for assessingNONMET the impacts of hurricanes on the Texas Gulf coast .
Hurricane damage through high winds and tidal surges causesNONMET an immense amount of destruction and posesNONMET a major threat to many coastal communities in the USA .
It has been estimatedNONMET , for example , that during the mid 1970s some 50 million US citizens were subject to hurricane winds of over 160 km/h and 6 million were subject to hurricane surge ( Brinkman 1975 ) .
The system describedNONMET by Berke and Ruch ( 1985 ) is raster-based and has an interesting modelling component calledNONMET SLOSH ( Sea , Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes ) .
SLOSH is able to estimateNONMET still water surge by grid cell for various hurricane intensities , angles of approach to the shoreline , forward movement speeds and landfall locations .
Additional algorithms are usedNONMET to modelNONMET total building damage costs for each grid cell basedNONMET on water-depth and speed-depth rating curves .
Hobeika and Jamei ( 1985 ) describeNONMET the MASSeVACuation ( MASSVAC ) simulation software designed to analyseNONMET and evaluateNONMET traffic evacuation plans givenNONMET a natural disaster in an urban area .
The system comprisesNONMET three interrelated modules : community and disaster type characteristics module ; population distribution module ; network evacuation module .
The type of natural disaster determinesNONMET the time period within which the road network has to be evacuatedNONMET .
The control and management strategies are directly correlatedNONMET to each specific disaster scenario .
MASSVAC is quite flexible and various user-defined road network options are available such as : traffic signal timings on the road network ; one-way traffic ; reserved lanes for special vehicles such as those of the emergency services .
Hobeika and Jamei have testedNONMET MASSVAC on various evacuation scenarios for Virginia Beach City in order to determineNONMET evacuation times for flood and hurricane conditions .
In general , they suggestNONMET that the model provided reasonable and reliable evacuation times .
Southworth et al. ( 1989 ) have enhancedNONMET the MASSVAC model with the addition of a colour graphics module which they callNONMET MVOPL .
This module has been developedNONMET usingNONMET IBM's Graphics Kernel System and providesNONMET a number of display screens .
The most interesting are those which portrayNONMET population flows as scaled ribbons on the network diagram , and evacuation shelter capacities as bar diagrams .
The diagrams are updatedNONMET periodically during the course of the simulation .
In dry parts of the world , such as Australia , forest and bush fires are an important natural hazard and some attention has been givenNONMET to the ways in which GIS might helpNONMET examineNONMET their potential impacts .
Kessell ( 1988 ) describesNONMET a PC-based GIS called PREPLAN ( PRistine Environment Planning LANguage ) which is a natural area management , land-use planning and fire modelling system developedNONMET for the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service , PREPLAN comprisesNONMET four modules : a simple raster-based GIS ; a grid cell resource database ; a wide range of vegetation , fuel , fire behaviour , erosion and land-use models ; tabular , statistical and colour graphics output system .
With this system real-time fire growth can be modelledNONMET , takingNONMET into account changes in terrain , fuel and temporal changes in the weather .
Kessell pointsNONMET out that uncontrollable fires are recurrent phenomena in many parts of Australia , causingNONMET damage in the hundreds of millions of dollars and significant loss of life .
Systems such as PREPLAN can provideNONMET the user with sound models of the behaviour patterns of fire and are therefore of enormous value in land-use planning .
One of the most widespread natural hazards is flooding , and the potential for loss of property , risk to life and general social disruption is large .
One interesting example of a GIS approach to floodNONMET damage estimation is the ANUFLOOD package which was developedNONMET in the early 1980s followingNONMET detailed flood damage studies for flood-prone coastal towns in northern New South Wales , Australia ( Smith and Greenaway , 1988 ) .
The ANUFLOOD system requiresNONMET locational and building type data on individual properties , stage-damage curves relatingNONMET the average damage that would resultNONMET from overfloor flooding to differing depths for each property type , and lastly , flood frequency in terms of flood height expressedNONMET as a probability .
Output from the system is both tabular and graphical .
Of particular interest is the construction of maps showingNONMET the expected annual amounts of damage for gridded flood-prone areas .
ANUFLOODNONMET also containsNONMET modules which permitNONMET the investigation of various flood damage mitigation options , such as property height raising , levee construction and flood proofing .
Environmental epidemiology The possibilities sketchedNONMET above relateNONMET to emergency planning , the search for hazardous sites , and risk assessment .
To what extent can GIS helpNONMET if an event occursNONMET ?
What , for instance , of the health consequences ?
There is a rich tradition of epidemiological work in geography and with the increasing availability of spatially referencedNONMET medical data the scope for GIS applications is wide ( Gatrell 1987 ) .
For instance , Diggle et al. ( 1990 ) assessNONMET the hypothesis that cancer of the larynx is associatedNONMET with proximity to a now-closed incinerator and developNONMET a statistical model from the theory of spatial point processes to testNONMET this .
This would have been impossible without the link providedNONMET from postcoded data ( increasingly available from sources such as cancer registries ) to Ordnance Survey ( OS ) grid references .
Such a link is providedNONMET by the Central Postcode Directory , which matchesNONMET all 1.5 million unit postcodes in the UK to grid references .
When the cases of laryngeal cancer are comparedNONMET with a null distribution ( providedNONMET by the distribution of much more common lung cancer ) the hypothesis is given strong support .
Although the proposed method is novel , it is but one of an increasingly large number of methods designedNONMET to detectNONMET and model ‘ clusters ’ of disease ( seeNONMET , for example , Cuzick and Edwards 1990 ) .
The work of Diggle et al. ( 1990 ) examinedNONMET only a single point source , though it generalizesNONMET to multiple sources and to linear hazards as well .
As a second example of health work linked to hazardNONMET studies we may citeNONMET the research being conductedNONMET by Cross ( 1989 ) on childhood leukaemia .
There are numerous hypotheses concerning the aetiology of this disease ( from ionizing radiation to viral transmission ) and Cross's approach is to collectNONMET digital data designed to testNONMET some of these hypotheses and to useNONMET ARC/INFO to displayNONMET and analyseNONMET results .
For instance , one hypothesis concernsNONMET the role of electromagnetic radiation , a source of which is overhead high-voltage transmission lines as notedNONMET earlier .
If these are digitized and buffer zones constructedNONMET around them ( Fig. 10.3 ) we can quite easily testNONMET hypotheses about prevalence in such buffer zones as comparedNONMET with prevalence outside .
However , we should bearNONMET in mind the earlier point about the resolution of the data , since such electromagnetic effects have a very weak effect beyond perhaps 50 m ( Wertheimer and Leeper 1982 ) .
There has been a suspicion for many years that high rates of stomach cancer in parts of Wales may be linkedNONMET to soilNONMET chemistry , specifically such factors as zinc/copper ratios , and to leadNONMET content in water supplies .
Matthews ( 1989 ) has usedNONMET data from the Regional Cancer Registry ( morbidity rather than mortality data ) and data on trace elements to examineNONMET this link .
Since the latter are available for a 5 km raster the registration data are assignedNONMET to these grid squares usingNONMET the OS grid reference .
As with any such study there are the usual problems of ecological analysis and influences of migration , together with issues of separatingNONMET out the risk factors under investigation from possible confounding factors .
In the USA , Morrill's report on the beginnings of a $15m. study into the possible radiation doses received as result of radiation releases by the Hanford ( Washington State ) nuclear complex would seemNONMET to cryNONMET out for GIS skills to be appliedNONMET ( Morrill 1989 ) .
The research project will employNONMET plume dispersion models in order to modelNONMET dispersal by wind and will needNONMET to integrateNONMET this and other environmental data with detailed demographic records .
To some extent this line of approach was anticipatedNONMET by Johnson ( 1981 ) in his study of exposure to plutonium fall-out from the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant near Denver ( seeNONMET Zeigler et al. 1983 : 47–8 ) .
UsingNONMET soil samples he constructedNONMET a contoured risk surface and then mappedNONMET excess cancers in various distance bands , detectingNONMET a marked distance decay effect .
Research problems and prospects The work reviewed above suggestsNONMET that the application of GIS techniques to hazardNONMET assessment , emergency planning and environmental monitoring is both actually and potentially an important research area with many challenging problems .
Undoubtedly , the GISs of the 1990s will lookNONMET very different from their rather primitive ancestors .
Computer power is becomingNONMET cheaper , digital data more readily available , and GISs are becomingNONMET hybrid systems involvingNONMET other technologies .
In this last section we highlightNONMET some important research areas as we seeNONMET them .
Doubtless there are many others , such is the surge of interest in GIS technology .
Data availability We should first considerMET the availability and quality of data concerning the populations who may be at risk from the storage and transport of hazardous substances , from toxic air pollution , from flooding and so on .
Such data are crucial , either for assistingNONMET the emergency services to makeMET assessments about resources they needNONMET to deployMET in such events , or for high estimates to be madeMET of risk .
Within the public domain in the UK we must relyNONMET in general on data from the most recent Population Census , the lowest level being that for enumeration districts ( EDs ) .
As is well knownNONMET ( Rhind 1983 ) these containNONMET on average perhaps 150–200 households and 400–500 people .
The boundaries EDs have not been widely digitizedNONMET , unlike the higher level electoral wards .
However , the centroids of EDs are available as 100 m grid references and artificial ED ‘ polygons ’ can be createdNONMET if necessary .
In some instances such data will sufficeNONMET ; in many cases they will have to sufficeNONMET as nothing better is available .
But in some areas EDs are very extensive physical units and the shapes will be quite distorted .
Furthermore , the scales at which population estimates are often required means that even EDs are too coarse for risk assessments .
For instance , in performingNONMET its quantitative risk assessments the Health and Safety Executive will rarely dealMET with distances from hazardous sites in excess of 1 km ( PettsNONMET 1988 ) and census data will not offerMET sufficient resolution for accurate population estimatesNONMET to be madeMET .
It should be pointedMET out , however , that the National Radiological Protection Board currently usesMET 1 km grid square resolution population data from the 1971 Census in its radiological protection studies ( Hallam et al. 1981 ) .
It would seemNONMET that , despite the costs involvedNONMET , they should considerMET investing in the very detailed digital data ( PinpointNONMET Address Code ( PAC ) ) provided by Pinpoint Analysis Ltd .
This area of application would appearNONMET to be an obvious market for such a product .
A useful research exercise would be to compareNONMET the use of census and PAC data in derivingMET quantitative risk assessments and this is an interesting research problem .
Even with PAC data some assumptions would needNONMET to be madeMET about numbers of persons per household if good population estimates were to be madeMET .
More generally , we needNONMET to considerMET the availability of large databases for hazard studies and emergency planning and this is an area ripe for major initiatives .
In the UK we seemNONMET to be laggingMET well behind the USA in the construction of databases on hazardous sites and especially hazard events such as those involvingNONMET toxic releases .
For instance , Lioy and Daisey ( 1987 ) , in their work on the monitoring of toxic air pollution in New Jersey , constructMET what they term a ‘ microinventory ’ for each of three towns , comprisingNONMET the locations of chemical plants , metal processing plants , paint spray manufacturers and so on .
Some attribute information is available for these .
More closely linkedMET to GIS is work by McMaster and Johnson ( 1986 ) who performNONMET a very detailed inventory of hazardous materials ( both stored and transportedNONMET ) in Santa Monica , California .
Although the raster displays are very crude it is simple to answerNONMET spatial queries concerning the locations of people ( for instance , particular age groups ) within certain distances of toxic hazard sites .
We have data on some hazardous sites ( e.g. those regulatedMET by CIMAH ) in the UK but a much more comprehensive approach should be adoptedMET , especially if we are serious in the search for environmental associations with chronic diseases .
The same is true for toxic releases .
In the USA the Environmental Protection Agency producesMET an Acute Hazards Events Database while the Department of Transportation has a database recording details of 25 000 releases of toxic materials ; such details includeMET locational information , type and amount of material releasedMET , mode of release and resulting injuries or deaths ( Cutter and Solecki 1989 ) .
Can we not useNONMET GIS technology to constructMET ‘ risk mosaics ’ ( Zeigler et al. 1983 ) , at a variety of spatial scales , akin to Hewitt and Burton's ‘ hazardousness ’ of a place ?
In the UK only a handful of county emergency planning departments ( Cumbria , for instance ) have builtMET up resource databases in digital form and this needsNONMET to be promotedNONMET .
Further afield , we needNONMET to recognizeMET that some disasters ( most obviously Chernobyl ) will have implications for more than one country so that environmental monitoring should takeMET place with some kind of international co-ordination .
There will also be movements of hazardous cargoes across frontiers and there are clearly problems of risk assessment and planning for emergencies at or near international boundaries , or at sea and airports .
As notedNONMET above , the work of Fedra ( 1989 ) is a major step in this direction , and links need to be forgedMET between initiatives in the UK and the rest of Europe .
In terms of databases on hazardous wastes , attention has already been drawnMET to the waste disposal plans preparedMET by WRAs .
These giveMET details of present site locations and some indication of permitted wastes , though little or no information on closed and abandoned sites .
However , for details of disposal the individual site licences must be consultedMET .
The former Hazardous Waste Inspectorate operatedMET a large database on all sites , with details of permitted wastes , including allowable quantities .
The database was createdNONMET by a commercial company , AspinwallsNONMET Ltd .
There are numerous potentially usable databases for environmental epidemiological work .
OPCS , of course , is a major data repository for medical statistics and their various Monitor Series are of use , though only at the scale of district health authority and above ( seeNONMET Gatrell and Lovett 1988 for an example ) .
Regional health authorities will from time to time produceMET mortality data at ward level .
However , if cancers are of interest it is more appropriate to obtainMET data from regional cancer registries ; these data are morbidity rather than mortality data and are therefore more valuable .
The data are postcoded and may have some occupational details .
For example , we have receivedNONMET data from the Regional Cancer Registry in Manchester comprisingNONMET all cancers of the larynx and lung notified between 1974 and 1984 .
This large data setMET , to which grid references have now been addedNONMET , comprisesNONMET information about nearly 40 000 individuals .
It has now been copiedMET into INGRES , a relational database management system , permittingMET queries to be madeMET about subsets of the data ; for instance , all males between the ages of 25 and 64 suffering from laryngeal cancer .
Other data sources on cancers are independent registries of malignancies .
An example is that on leukaemias , managedNONMET by the Leukaemia Research Fund Centre in Leeds ( Alexander et al. 1989 ) .
It should be notedMET that there are frequently major discrepancies between the regional registries and the specialist registries , partly because the latter receiveMET notifications directly from consultants .
Indeed , workingNONMET directly with consultants provesNONMET invaluable in gainingMET access to high morbidity data .
Two other potential sources of data are worth mentioningMET .
First , attention should be drawnMET to the new directive from the Department of Health to regional and district health authorities to reviewNONMET the health of the population .
This meansNONMET in practice that district medical officers are chargedMET with preparingNONMET an annual report , presentingMET and interpretingNONMET epidemiological data , identifyingNONMET local health problems and evaluatingNONMET service outcomes .
Lancaster University is already heavily involved in the work of Preston District Health Authority in this area .
Second , family health service authorities ( FHSAs ) , are also requiredNONMET to takeMET on these roles , but from the viewpoint of primary health care services .
FHSAs ( which correspondNONMET to non-metropolitan counties and to metropolitan boroughs ) holdMET large databases on services providedNONMET by general practitioners ; for instance , uptake of immunization and screening for breast and cervical cancers .
Is it , we wonderNONMET , possible to contemplateMET bringingNONMET together some of these data sources to formMET a National Online Health Information System ( NOHIS ) , to parallelMET that for employment and unemployment ( Townsend et al. 1987 ) ?
This might includeMET data on morbidity and mortality , uptake of preventative medicine , service use and availability , at both primary and hospital level .
It would be a useful management tool , particularly in view of the reorganization takingMET place in the National Health Service .
It should not be forgottenNONMET that hazards themselves have geographical distributions yet there has been little effort in the UK to developNONMET public domain databases .
Are there hazard- prone areas ?
Is there a regional differentiation in hazard type ?
These are , of course , commercially important questions and a good deal of money is goingMET into the collection of such data by insurance companies .
One well knownNONMET database is Major Hazard Incident Data Service ( MHIDAS ) global industrial hazards database which is currently being developedNONMET by the Safety and Reliability Directorate on behalf of the Major Hazards Assessment Unit of the UK Health and Safety Directorate .
This system currently runsMET in dBASE II and containsMET in excess of 3000 items of professionally assessedMET information on major hazards coded into some 24 separate fields .
Unfortunately , the spatial referencing is poor and with some effort this could easily be remediedNONMET .
It is , for example , little use when recordingNONMET a chemical spill into an Egyptian river to have enteredMET into the appropriate field ‘ the Nile ’ — after all , this river is some 6480 km long !
Here , in our view , is a classic case of the absence of a geographical input renderingMET the data of limited value .
In some cases , good hazard data existNONMET but have simply not yet found their way into a GIS .
A case in point is inland and coastal flooding .
Most river authorities have detailedNONMET maps showingMET the geographical limits of floods in relation to their return periods .
Within the next decade , as the privatized water companies developNONMET their GIS , we shall seeNONMET a massive amount of data conversion in this area .
This development , together with the availability of digital terrain models , will allowMET quite sophisticated flood forecasting models to be developedNONMET within a GIS framework .
As sea-levels rise in the next 20–30 years due to the ‘ greenhouse ’ effect , this very practical use of GIS technology is likely to becomeNONMET commonplace and of considerable practical importance .
Spatial statistics Another way in which there needsNONMET to be a rapprochement between statistical methods and GIS is in the area of spatial sampling and estimation from spatial samples .
This is clearly an important issue in radiation monitoring as the discussion of RIMNET above impliesMET .
As an example , Peirson ( 1988 ) has reviewedNONMET the evidence on artificial radioactivity in Cumbria and showsNONMET maps of the distribution of certain radionuclides as contoured surfaces .
The point worth makingMET here is that there are many alternative schemes for interpolatingNONMET from irregular point data ( Lam 1983 ) .
One method in particular , krigingNONMET ( now available as part of the UNIRAS software ) , offersMET not only a contoured surface but also an estimate of the standard error at any point on the map .
Where this is high it suggestsMET that an additional sampling station might be set up .
Such techniques are now standard in environmental science ( seeNONMET Streit 1981 for an application to rainfall monitoring ) and need to be promotedNONMET vigorously in hazard studies ( Estes et al. 1987 ) .
Related to this problem is that of makingMET population estimates for new zones that result from overlay operations .
We may wantNONMET to countNONMET numbers livingNONMET within plumes , circles of fixed radius , buffer zones and so on .
Existing GIS techniques usually baseMET the estimates on area-weighted shares , so that a new polygon createdNONMET by ‘ slicingMET ’ an existing area in half is assignedMET half the population of that source unit .
This may be quite absurd in some cases , notably where population is spatially clusteredNONMET within a physically large ED .
At the NWRRL work is under way ( Flowerdew and Green 1989 ) to solveNONMET such problems usingNONMET the EM algorithm and the statistical modelling package GLIM , which has been interfacedMET with ARC/INFO .
Operations research methods and simulation While there is some research activity in linkingMET statistical models to GIS there would seemNONMET to be scope for further applications of operations research techniques to GIS problems .
Within some sophisticated GIS such as ARC/INFO there are some useful algorithms ( such as shortest path calculations ) , but GIS developers have in general failedMET to realizeNONMET the natural links between GIS functions and many operations research techniques .
Over the last 20 years or so a large theoretical literature has been developedNONMET to provideNONMET tools for the solution of many problems associatedNONMET with emergency planning ( Kolesar 1981 ) .
One important class of problems is the selection of locations for the emergency service units .
The choice of locations need not be for permanent bases , but can also includeMET dynamic repositioning of units as circumstances dictateMET ( Kolesar and Walker 1974 ) .
In any major emergency a typical problem is the assignment of resources to demands .
If resources are heldMET at one set of locations and the demands are at another and the costs of transportation are knownNONMET , how do we allocateNONMET the resources most efficiently ?
In a major emergency , for example , there might be a need to supplyNONMET blood products held at regional blood banks to hospitals .
This , of course , is the classic transportation problem and its solution is well knownNONMET .
As far as we knowNONMET the microcomputer- based emergency response system devisedNONMET by Belardo et al. ( 1983 ) , is the only GIS-like software to incorporateNONMET this algorithm .
In this system , the solution to the transportation problem is shownNONMET graphically on the road network , which is displayedNONMET on the computer screen .
As a last example of the potential role of operations research in GIS and disaster management we are remindedNONMET of the logistic problems that facedMET the Peel Regional Police Force  during the Mississauga evacuation mentioned previously ( Scanlon and Padgham 1980 ) .
During the early states of the phased evacuation the logistical problem facingMET the police was the street-by-street warning of the population to makeMET ready for evacuation .
Speed was of the essence and manpower was limited .
Here , then , is a familiar operations research network problem : all roads have to be traversedNONMET such that the journey length/time is a minimum .
This is the so-called Chinese postman problem , which providesNONMET a Hamiltonian circuit through the arcs ( as comparedNONMET with the travelling salesman problem which is a minimum route through the network nodes ) .
CHAPTER NINE ‘ I have a very important assignment for you , Paula , ’ Arlene Frampton-Cox saidNONMET .
She insertedNONMET a Du Maurier cigarette into her long tortoiseshell holder and satNONMET back , lookingNONMET at Paula , who was seatedNONMET in the visitor's chair on the other side of the desk , long legs crossed elegantly .
Paula lookedNONMET every inch a model these days , Arlene thoughtNONMET with a touch of proprietorial pride .
Her long hair , shining gold , was sweptNONMET back and caught at the nape of her neck with a bow , make-up , expertly applied , accentuatedNONMET the classically beautiful lines of her face , and she woreNONMET her well-cut suit with all the panache that was expected of her .
A good suit was a working model's uniform — Paula now boughtNONMET two each season and woreNONMET them with perfectly matching accessories , hat , bag and shoes .
This one was in soft light green with a boxy shaped jacket and narrow skirt and the same green-and-white check material of the little sleeveless blouse had been usedNONMET to lineMET the jacket and faceMET the wide reveresNONMET .
Paula's bag and shoes were patent black leather , her gloves white , and she carriedNONMET a long walking umbrella neatly furled in its fur-trimmed case .
Perfectly groomedMET from head to toe and with all that assurance , she was ready to take on the world , Arlene thoughtNONMET with satisfaction , for she lookedMET on Paula as her very own creation .
The raw materials might have been there before — indeed , hadn't it been she , Arlene , who had spottedMET them ?
But the transformation of a leggy young filly into a sleekly beautiful racehorse had been her doing .
eighteen months on the model circuit had eliminatedMET all trace of her former Somerset accent .
She had listenedNONMET to Arlene's own voice and set about imitatingMET it for she heldMET her mentor in the highest esteem whilst still being a little afraid of her .
The House of Mattli is expanding from couture into ready-to-wear and one of the big Bristol stores , Taylors , are puttingMET on a show to publiciseNONMET the fact that they will be stockingNONMET the new prêt-è-porter ' , Arlene explainedNONMET .
‘ I have been askedNONMET to supplyMET the models and I would likeNONMET you to be one of them .
’ ‘ Mattli !
’ Paula repeatedNONMET , impressed .
The House of Mattli was a husband and wife team who were numberedNONMET amongst the top ten names in the Incorporated Society of London Fashion Designers .
Furthermore Madame Mattli was a Frenchwoman , an accident of birth which addedNONMET to her glamour , for was not Paris the fashion capital of the world ?
‘ Madame Mattli will be comingNONMET to Bristol herself , ’ Arlene continuedNONMET .
‘ Taylors have a certain amount of stock but she will be bringingNONMET extra samples from London especially for the show .
I only wantNONMET the best of my girls on this job .
Madame Mattli , rememberNONMET , is usedNONMET to the best .
We can't affordMET any sloppiness .
I can countNONMET on you , Paula , I feelMET sure .
’ ‘ Oh yes , ’ Paula saidNONMET , brimmingMET with suppressed excitement .
‘ You can countNONMET on me !
’ Madame Mattli was almost exactly as Paula had imaginedNONMET she would be , a petite perfectly turned out woman with an air of chic that was unmistakably French .
Her dark , grey -streaked hair , which she woreNONMET in a long bob , had been cutNONMET by Vidal Sassoon and she woreNONMET a beautifully tailored black suit relieved only by a little white flounce at the neckline .
In the fitting rooms at Taylors she fussedNONMET and frettedNONMET over her creations like a mother hen and though Paula was overawedNONMET by the great designer she also liked her on sight .
Madame Mattli might be a stickler for detail , with a generous helping of the artistic temperament which keptNONMET her tight-coiled as a spring and which would explodeMET into frenzy if the smallest detail was not as it should be , but she also had a kind face and deep perceptive eyes .
Half way through the day's programme of shows , while the dressers wentNONMET off to grabNONMET a sandwich and the model girls , who would not dareNONMET to eatNONMET while they were showingNONMET , revivedMET themselves with cups of black coffee , Madame Mattli tookNONMET Paula to one side .
‘ Little one , I would likeNONMET to speakNONMET with you .
’ Paula's stomach turnedMET a somersault .
Had she done something wrong ?
‘ I have been watchingNONMET you workNONMET , ’ Madame Mattli saidNONMET directly .
Her accent remindedNONMET Paula of Louise — perhaps that was why she warmedMET to her in spite of the fact that she was so awe-inspiring .
‘ You are exactly right for a couture model .
You have all the physical attributes .
’ ‘ ThankNONMET you , ’ Paula saidNONMET faintly .
Madame Mattli wavedNONMET a dismissive hand .
‘ Do not thankNONMET me .
I am not sayingNONMET this to makeMET your head swell .
On the contrary .
The fact is that I have a vacancy arisingMET for a couture model .
I believeNONMET you are exactly what I am lookingMET for .
I would likeNONMET you to comeNONMET to London to workNONMET for me .
’ Over Madame Mattli's shoulder Paula could seeNONMET Arlene watchingNONMET her , a tiny smile lifting one corner of her scarlet mouth , and Paula knewNONMET her well enough by now to knowNONMET exactly what she was thinkingNONMET .
She did not wantNONMET to loseMET Paula , who was one of her best models , but already she was enjoyingNONMET the reflected glory that cameMET from having personally trainedNONMET a house model for one of the great London couture houses .
She had knownNONMET about the vacancy at Mattli and hopedNONMET that the job might be offeredNONMET to Paula .
It was the seal of approval for her own judgement .
‘ Well ?
’ Madame Mattli demandedNONMET .
‘ Can I have a little time to think it over ?
’ Paula askedNONMET boldly .
‘ A little .
But please do not delayNONMET too long .
My present house model leaves at the end of the month and there are plenty of girls who would jumpMET at the chance .
’ ‘ I'm sure .
But all the same I couldn't makeMET such a move without givingMET it some thought , ’ Paula saidNONMET grandly .
But inside she was bubblingMET with excitement .
Time to thinkNONMET ?
She didn't needNONMET a single second .
The moment Madame Mattli had offeredNONMET her the job she had madeMET up her mind .
She was goingNONMET to takeMET it — of course !
A month later Paula , smartly dressedNONMET in a new tweed suit with the obligatory matching bag and shoes , and luggingNONMET both her modelling case and a brand new cream leather suitcase , tookMET the train to London to beginNONMET her new career .
She had bookedNONMET herself a bed at a YWCA hostel for the time being .
It was not quite what she envisagedNONMET for herself but it had the advantage of being cheap and it wentMET some way towards satisfying Grace , who was convinced that London was a den of iniquity waitingMET to swallow up her unsuspecting daughter .
From the hostel it was only a short tube ride to South Audley Street where Madame Mattli had her showrooms — yet another advantage , Paula thoughtNONMET , tryingNONMET to weigh up the points in favour of the hostel , which she hatedNONMET on sight .
SharingNONMET a small spartan room with two other girls — Northerners whose accent Paula foundMET almost incomprehensible and with whom she had nothing in common , makingNONMET breakfast in the communal kitchen , queuingNONMET for the bath , adheringMET to a strict curfew after which time the doors were locked and bolted — none of these were restrictions Paula had the slightest intention of enduring for long .
But for now it would have to do .
And at least she was in London , centre of the British fashion industry .
As for the House of Mattli , it might have been in a different world to the hostel , with its air of being a cross between a workhouse and a boarding school .
The first time she rangNONMET the bell and wentNONMET in through the front doors of the elegant old house where the showrooms were situatedNONMET ( Mattli had no rear entrance ) Paula feltNONMET she was steppingNONMET into the place of her dreams .
Deep carpet coveredNONMET the floors and the stairs swept up to the showrooms and the warren of workrooms beyond , and though the window drapes and furnishings were ever-so-slightly faded , as if they had seenMET better days , they were of the finest silks and velvets and every corner was sweptNONMET , polished and cleanedNONMET daily so that no single speck of dust , let alone a cobweb , dared show itself .
The showroom was neither large nor small , decorated in muted shades of aubergine which would not detractNONMET from the clothes .
There was a low table and three or four dainty chairs with aubergine velvet seats and gilded spindle legs .
The crystal chandelier was for effect only — lighting that would show off the clothes to their best advantage was brilliant yet discreet , and along one wall were racks holdingNONMET some of the ready-to-wear garments .
In contrast to this elegant frontage the workrooms beyond were a hive of frenzied activity .
Pattern cutters , fitters , sewingNONMET hands and their assistants all workedNONMET at an incredible speed .
This , Paula soon discoveredMET , was the way of the fashion world — a constant frantic rush against the clock , to have collections ready on time or to completeNONMET individual couture garments for customers who always consideredNONMET their order more urgent , more important , than that of anyone else .
Paula was amazed by the security arrangements that were necessary to ensureNONMET that the new season's collections remainedNONMET exclusive — the windows at the rear of the premises were heavily barredNONMET and practically the first thing she had to do on commencingNONMET her employment was to signNONMET a contract promising that she would not breatheMET a word about the designs she sawNONMET .
On her second day Madame Mattli tookNONMET her to Vidal Sassoon's salon in Grosvenor House so that her hair could be cutNONMET in an up-to-the-minute style .
Unlike some couturiers Madame did not mindNONMET if her model girls did not have the same colour hair but she did insistNONMET on identical styles .
By the time Vidal Sassoon had finishedNONMET with her Paula's long fair locks had been shornNONMET to a sharp geometric shape and she scarcely recognised the reflection that lookedMET back at her from the mirror .
Among the rich and famous who had comeNONMET to the salon to have their hair cutNONMET , tintedNONMET and setNONMET , Paula recognisedNONMET Dusty Springfield , the pop singer , her eyes big and sooty , her lips pearly pink , and was unable to suppressMET the thrill of excitement which ranMET through her .
This was her very first taste of only the best being good enough — and she likedNONMET it !
It was Paula's job to showNONMET samples , paradingNONMET slowly up and down in front of the clients as they satNONMET on the elegant spindle-leg chairs takingMET in every detail of the garments with a critical and practised eye .
Sometimes they cameNONMET alone , sometimes with a man in tow — to footMET the bill !
Paula guessedNONMET .
The appearance of a famous face in the show rooms always caused a stir amongst the girls , who all longedNONMET to hookMET a wealthy husband — and if he had a title , like the Aly Khan , or was a film star like Omar Shariff , then so much the better !
Not everything that Paula had to do was quite so glamorous , however .
In the long hours when there were no customers to showNONMET she was expectedNONMET to lendMET a hand with some of the unskilled tasks — running errands and makingNONMET tea , unpickingNONMET a seam or a hem , even sewingNONMET on a button or a hook and eye when she had been taughtNONMET the proper way to do it .
Paula was not very clever with her needle but she soon learnedNONMET to be careful so as not to incurNONMET the wrath of the seamstress .
There were new tricks of modelling to be learnedNONMET too — how to removeNONMET a coat , slidingNONMET It carefully off her shoulders with the sleeves hangingNONMET in perfect balance , never for one moment allowingNONMET the inside to be on view , for samples were often unlined .
This trick tookMET hours of practice , up and down the landing at the hostel while the other girls lookedNONMET at her as if she had taken leave of her senses .
Although she enjoyedNONMET her job Paula was lonely .
Even the most popular of girls soon discoveredNONMET that in this highly competitive world where models viedNONMET with one another for the most glamorous jobs and the wealthiest and best-looking men there was far more bitchiness than in the provinces — and Paula was far from popular .
The other girls dislikedNONMET her for her outstanding looks and her haughty ways and madeMET no attempt to be friendly on anything but the most superficial level and the pattern cutters and sewing hands hurried home to their families and boyfriends the moment they finishedNONMET their long day's work .
Paula spentMET most of her free time alone , window shopping , visiting News Theatres , where she sometimes watchedNONMET the programme of cartoons twice round , and drinkingNONMET endless cups of Espresso coffee in cafés and coffee houses .
Her favourite was the coffee shop in Fenwicks in Bond Street for this was the haunt and the meeting place of all those from the world of fashion .
One lunchtime when she had been at the House of Mattli for a few months Paula wentNONMET there for her usual coffee and the cottage cheese salad that was her staple diet now that it was so important that she did not addNONMET a single half-inch to her wand- figure .
She tookNONMET her tray to the pay desk , openedNONMET her bag and felt for her purse .
It was not there .
Frantically she rootedMET round , then checkedNONMET her pockets without success .
‘ I'm sorry .
I seemNONMET to have lostNONMET my purse … ’ she explainedNONMET .
The girl behind the till staredNONMET at her stonily .
Paula was goingNONMET hot and cold by now .
Had it been stolenNONMET ?
No , she rememberedNONMET her bag tipping over in the cloakroom at Mattli — it must have fallenNONMET out then .
But without it she could not payNONMET for her coffee and salad .
‘ Having trouble ?
’ a voice beside her askedMET .
‘ Don't worryMET .
LetNONMET me .
’ Paula turnedNONMET gratefully , then gaspedNONMET with surprise as she recognisedNONMET the slight figure in black roll-neck sweater and skin tight pants .
‘ I don't believeNONMET it !
Gary Oliver !
What are you doing here ?
’ ‘ The same as you I expectNONMET , Paula — gettingMET my strength up to faceMET the rest of the day .
LetNONMET me payNONMET and then we'll have lunch together and do some catchingMET up — unless you're meetingNONMET someone , of course .
’ ‘ No — no , I'm not .
’ Paula picked up her try and moved aside waitingNONMET for him , flushed with pleasure at seeingNONMET a familiar face .
Gary Oliver was a designer , young and very talented .
She had metNONMET him back home in the west country when he had comeNONMET to superviseNONMET a show put on  by one of the big ready-to-wear labels , Carnega , for whom he workedNONMET as a junior member of the design team .
For a whole week they had workedNONMET closely together , sharingNONMET flasks of coffee and packets of cigarettes and Paula had grownMET to likeNONMET the pixie ish little man who  by his very nature offeredMET her no challenge — and no threat .
Gary should have been a girl , she had thoughtNONMET , for he was half a head smaller than she was with fair curling hair , baby-blue eyes and long thick lashes that were the envy of every woman who metNONMET him .
‘ Shall we sitNONMET over there in the corner ?
’ Gary suggestedNONMET .
He ledNONMET the way , his slim hips in the tight fitting pants snakingNONMET gracefully between the tables .
They unloadedMET their trays on to a table .
‘ What are you doing in London  then , Paula ?
Apart from mislayingNONMET your purse , I meanNONMET .
’ He grinnedNONMET at her impishly .
She toldNONMET him .
‘ And what about you ?
Aren't you with Carnega any more ?
’ He shookNONMET his head .
Dimples played in his cheeks .
‘ No — now I'm with the House of Oliver .
’ ‘ The House of Oliver … ?
Oh !
’ she squealedNONMET as light dawnedMET .
‘ Your own  house ?
You've setMET up as a designer in your own right , Gary !
’ ‘ Yep .
In a small way at the moment , of course , but things are happeningNONMET .
I cameMET into a bit of money when my grandmother diedNONMET and I decidedNONMET to putMET it to good use .
’ ‘ Isn't it a bit of a risk ?
’ Paula askedNONMET .
He shruggedNONMET his narrow shoulders .
‘ Perhaps .
But I wantedNONMET to workNONMET for myself .
DesigningNONMET clothes for Carnega was all very well and I madeMET a good living at it I won't denyNONMET but I wantedNONMET to be free to do my own thing — and to have my own name on the labels .
I have quite a few contacts — people who knewNONMET me when I was designingNONMET for Carnega — and they have been very encouraging .
So I have decidedNONMET to moveNONMET to London and openMET a showroom .
In fact I have just been lookingNONMET at a place in South Audley Street , not far from Mattli .
If it  worksNONMET out we shall practically be neighbours , Paula .
’ ‘ What a small world !
I had no idea , ’ Paula saidNONMET , surprisedNONMET she had not already heardNONMET the news .
Usually the slightest whisper travelledMET like jungle drums through the world of fashion .
Until now Gary had been an out-of-town designer , of course .
But if he was movingMET to London his new fashion  house would soon be a talking point .
‘ We must keepMET in touch , ’ Gary saidNONMET as he finishedNONMET his cheese roll .
‘ PromiseNONMET you'll look in and sayNONMET hello when you have time .
’ ‘ I will .
Apart from anything else I oweMET you a coffee .
’ ‘ True .
I don't supposeNONMET I could persuadeNONMET you to workNONMET for me in return ?
I'm lookingMET for a couple of good models .
Though I don't supposeNONMET I could affordNONMET to payNONMET you as well as Mattli does — yet .
Maybe one day … ’ Paula laughedNONMET .
‘ I don't earnNONMET that much !
By the time I've paidNONMET for my room at the YWCA and boughtNONMET all the make-up and clothes I needNONMET there never seemsNONMET to be anything leftNONMET over .
I'm lookingMET for a rich husband to takeMET me away from it all .
’ ‘ And I'm sure one day you'll findNONMET him .
In the meantime , don't forgetNONMET your friends , eh Paula ?
’ ‘ I won't , ’ she promisedNONMET , glancingNONMET at her watch .
‘ Oh hell , I shall have to goNONMET .
’ ‘ Me too .
But it was great to seeNONMET you again , Paula .
’ They walkedNONMET back to South Audley Street together , weavingMET their way through the lunchtime crowds on the pavements , the tall , striking girl and the young man whose pixie ish looks beliedNONMET his twenty-six years .
Outside the front entrance of the House of Mattli Paula turnedNONMET to giveMET him a quick impulsive hug .
‘ Thanks for the lunch , Gary .
And good luck with your new venture !
’ She heldNONMET up her fingers , tightly crossedNONMET for him .
He grinnedNONMET .
‘ I'll needNONMET it .
Don't forgetNONMET to comeNONMET and seeNONMET me , will you ?
I shall be expectingNONMET you .
’ ‘ I won't forgetNONMET .
'Bye for now !
’ she calledNONMET , and ranNONMET in through the imposing front door .
Madame Mattli was furious .
In all the time she had been with her Paula had never seenNONMET her so angry .
‘ I hearNONMET you have been seenNONMET goingNONMET into the  House of Oliver , ’ she saidNONMET , her immaculately painted lips tight with fury .
Beside her Monsieur Mattli , a small Greek-looking man , some ten years her senior , was also quivering with indignation .
‘ Not once but several times , ’ he addedMET .
It was so unusual for him to contributeMET anything to the conversation that Paula glancedNONMET at him in surprise .
Though he was always in evidence it was invariably Madame who did all the talking , givingMET orders , fussingNONMET around clients , so that Paula was never quite certain what his role was .
‘ Gary Oliver is a friend , ’ she saidNONMET defensively .
Madame Mattli snortedNONMET angrily .
‘ I do not payNONMET you to have friends in rival fashion  houses .
’ ‘ He's not a rival … ’ Paula brokeMET off .
It seemedNONMET ridiculous that a newcomer like Gary could be any threat to a well-established  house like Mattli .
But in the cut-throat world of fashion up and coming designers were to be fearedNONMET — and already Gary's reputation was growing .
‘ You knowNONMET that we insistNONMET on complete loyalty , ’ Madame Mattli continuedNONMET .
‘ The security of our designs is paramount .
Oh Paula , how could you !
’ ‘ But I would never mentionNONMET anything I have seenNONMET here !
’ Paula protestedNONMET .
Madame snortedNONMET again .
‘ How can I be sure of that ?
Even if you do not intendNONMET to be disloyal there is always the risk that you might be careless .
Pillow talk is the most dangerous .
’ ‘ Pillow talk !
’ Paula repeatedNONMET , stunned .
CloseMET though her friendship with Gary had becomeNONMET she had never once breathedMET a word to him about the new collections she sawNONMET takingMET shape at Mattli — and as for ‘ pillow talk ’ the notion was absurd .
There was nothing like that between them and never would be .
Gary was not interested in girls .
Surely that must be obvious to everyone who metNONMET him .
‘ You must stopNONMET visitingNONMET him , ’ Madame saidNONMET firmly .
‘ Either I have your word on It or I am  afraid you can no longer remainNONMET in my employ .
I wantNONMET you to promiseNONMET me here and now that you will not seeNONMET Gary Oliver again .
’ Paula was tremblingNONMET .
Her job with the House of Mattli was her life .
But to allowNONMET herself to be dictatedMET to in this way when she knewNONMET she had done nothing wrong was tantamount to admitting guilt .
And she couldn't bearMET the thought of being suckedMET back into the ebb tide of loneliness again either .
With Gary she enjoyedMET a relationship she had never experiencedNONMET with anyone else — the easy-going friendship of a male who madeMET no demands whatever on her — and it meantMET more to her than she had realisedNONMET .
‘ I have never betrayedMET any confidence and I never will .
But you can't expectNONMET me to cutMET myself off from my friends , ’ she saidNONMET .
‘ I am  afraid I do expectNONMET it , Paula , in this case .
’ ‘ I can't promiseNONMET not to seeNONMET Gary again .
’ ‘ Very well .
’ There was a hint of sadness now in Madame's eyes but her mouth was setMET and determined .
‘ I shall be sorry to loseMET you , Paula .
You are a good model and you suitedMET me very well .
But you leaveMET me no choice .
Please do not botherNONMET to comeNONMET in again .
I shall contactNONMET the agency for a replacement immediately .
And I warnNONMET you , if any of my designs or anything like them turnMET up in the showroom at the House of Oliver I shall sueNONMET — and winNONMET the sort of damages that will putMET your little friend out of business for good .
Do I makeMET myself clear ?
’ Paula was still afraid of Madame Mattli — and she was also close to tears .
But she was determined Madame should not be aware of either .
‘ Yes , Madame .
I'm sorry to leaveMET you , but I assureNONMET you you need not worryMET on that score .
’ The showrooms of the House of Oliver were smaller and less grand than those at the House of Mattli but the décor was newer and fresher , pale grey drapes , ultra modern black furniture and a great deal of gleaming stainless steel .
Gary was in the workroom when Paula arrivedNONMET , pinningNONMET a length of vibrant pink chiffon sarong-style around one of his models .
His mouth was full of pins .
‘ What are you doing here ?
’ he askedNONMET without movingNONMET his lips .
Paula perchedMET herself against the cutting table tryingMET to lookNONMET nonchalant .
‘ I've leftMET Mattli , ’ she saidNONMET .
Gary staredNONMET at her for a moment , pins spewingMET from his mouth and catchingMET on the front of his black jersey .
Then he unpinned the length of chiffon and letNONMET it fallNONMET to the floor .
The model stoodNONMET motionless , cladNONMET in nothing but her bra and stockings , waitingNONMET for his instructions .
‘ We'll leaveMET this for now , Claudia ’ , he saidNONMET .
‘ SeeMET if you can rustle up a cup of tea for Paula and me , please .
’ The girl pulled on her wrap and moved to the door lookingNONMET back over her shoulder as she wentNONMET and Paula was aware of the hostility in her gaze .
Why was it all women hatedNONMET her so , even when they didn't knowNONMET her ?
She shruggedNONMET .
Oh well , she should be used to it by now … Gary got up , tookNONMET Paula by the arm and ledNONMET her over to the low sofa .
‘ What's all this about , lovey ?
You can't have left Mattli .
’ ‘ I have .
’ Paula relatedMET what had happenedNONMET and sawNONMET Gary turnNONMET pale .
‘ Oh Lord !
You meanNONMET she thinksNONMET you've been spyingNONMET for me !
If she suesNONMET I'll be ruinedMET .
Even worse , someone of her stature could makeMET a hell of a lot of trouble for me , even if she doesn't .
’ ‘ But Gary — I haven't been spyingNONMET for you !
I haven't even mentionedNONMET a single detail of the Mattli collection .
’ ‘ You knowNONMET that and so do I. But supposeNONMET I've done something similar ?
It happensNONMET every season — by sheer chance and law of averages some of the ideas are boundMET to comeMET up .
There are always accusations of piracy and copy-catting , though they can't usually be substantiatedNONMET .
But if she can proveNONMET that you and I … ’ ‘ That's nonsense !
We haven't done anything wrong .
’ Gary ranMET a distracted hand through his mop of fair hair .
‘ You're goingNONMET to have to describeNONMET the Mattli collection to me .
Every detail .
’ ‘ Gary !
’ she objectedNONMET , shockedMET .
‘ You're an original .
You can't stealMET their ideas !
’ ‘ No , idiot — not so that I can stealMET them .
So that I can goMET through my designs and makeMET quite certain that there is not one collar , not one cuff detail , not the slightest influence that they could accuseNONMET me of copyingMET from them .
Oh Jesus Christ !
— supposeNONMET there's something major ?
My peg top evening gown — my beautiful cerise lace — I could end up having to rethinkNONMET the whole collection !
’ ‘ For goodness sake stop panicking !
’ Paula saidNONMET , though she could feelNONMET the seeds of panic herself .
‘ I'm sure there's nothing to worryMET about .
’ ‘ I only hopeNONMET you're right !
’ he saidNONMET in anguished tones .
The model cameNONMET in with the cups of tea , still gloweringNONMET darkly at Paula from beneath her fringe of false eyelashes .
It was clear she was blamingNONMET Paula bitterly for the interrupted afternoon and her boss's drastic change of mood .
‘ That girl is a dog !
’ Paula saidNONMET when they were alone again .
‘ I'm sure she can't do justice to your designs .
And with a miserable face like hers I'm surprised you ever getMET any work done at all .
’ Gary lookedNONMET crestfallen .
‘ She's the best I could getNONMET … ’ ‘ Oh what rubbish !
’ Paula saidNONMET roundly .
‘ Anyway , you've gotNONMET me now so you can getMET ridMET of her .
’ ‘ What do you meanNONMET ?
’ Gary askedNONMET .
He lookedNONMET like a worried small boy .
‘ I toldNONMET you — I've leftMET Mattli .
I'll comeNONMET and workNONMET for you .
’ ‘ Oh Paula !
’ Gary's expression becameNONMET even more anxious .
‘ You knowNONMET I'd giveNONMET my right arm to have someone as good as you to modelMET for me !
But I toldNONMET you before — I couldn't affordNONMET to payNONMET you what you're worth .
Well , not for ages , anyway .
It's goingNONMET to be a long struggle gettingNONMET established and until I am I don't seeMET how … ’ Paula smiledNONMET .
For the first time she feltNONMET the stirrings of something like power .
It was not unlike the feeling she experiencedNONMET when men lookedNONMET at her and wantedNONMET her though she knewNONMET it could not be that for there was nothing sexual between her and Gary and never would be .
But it was just as exciting , nevertheless .
It madeMET her feelNONMET strong , invincible almost , and just a tiny bit as if she had drunk too much wine .
Her smile spread .
Grant's remains were shovelledNONMET into a canvas bag .
TenseMET , facingNONMET outwards , Forster , Lawton and Nell guarded Delaney as he intonedNONMET the seaman's prayer of interment , and then committed the canvas bag to the ocean .
The storm was abatingNONMET rapidly , the evening sky clearing in the west with the golden rays of the setting sun addingMET a dying colour to the sullen slate blue water .
The whiteness of the canvas body-bag dimmed beneath the onrushing sea , faded at the edges , then grew smaller , greener , and was goneMET .
They returnedNONMET to the bridge , fearful of every dark place — every corner , every door .
The gangway lamps seemedNONMET to giveMET no light , only addMET further to the gloom of the dusk .
Back in the wheelhouse , Delaney facedNONMET them .
‘ Right .
You all knowNONMET the score .
As I seeMET it we've gotMET two choices .
One , we getNONMET out of here now .
LaunchNONMET the lifeboat , takeMET our chances , or … two , we goNONMET after whatever it is .
’ Nobody spokeNONMET immediately .
Finally Forster glancedNONMET at Lawton for support , and drawledNONMET laconically .
‘ I'm not leavingNONMET here until we've done for that bastard .
It's personal from now on in !
’ Lawton noddedNONMET his agreement .
‘ Yes , ’ he saidNONMET , ‘ I feelMET the same .
’ ‘ Nell ?
’ Delaney askedNONMET , lookingNONMET at her squarely .
‘ I agreeNONMET , ’ she saidNONMET without hesitation .
Their tense , edgy faces watchedMET Delaney closely .
‘ We don't knowNONMET what we're up against , ’ Delaney saidNONMET , ‘ so let's proceedMET with maximum caution .
’ ‘ Trouble is , ’ Lawton saidNONMET , with a frown , ‘ there aren't enough of us to searchNONMET the ship .
It can workMET its way past us , and hideNONMET again .
We could still be lookingNONMET for it when they blowMET us out of the water .
’ ‘ That's why we've gotNONMET to takeMET risks , ’ Nell putMET in .
‘ LureMET it into a trap , somehow .
And quickly .
Forster's chuckle was mirthless .
‘ I don't thinkNONMET this joker is goingNONMET to needNONMET much encouragement .
’ ‘ No .
’ Delaney was momentarily thoughtful .
‘ What had you in mind , Nell ?
’ She pointedNONMET to the figure of a man proppedNONMET in the corner , and the cylinders of oxygen in the back pack lyingMET beside it .
‘ Two of our number have been killedNONMET .
Each time when they were on their own .
Let's giveMET it the same conditions , only this time we useNONMET that as the bait .
’ They lookedNONMET at the ‘ man ’ Forster had foundNONMET .
It was a safety suit , an advanced model of the NBC type with its own oxygen tanks .
‘ One in ambush , with the rest of us actingNONMET like beaters .
Start at one end of the ship , makingMET as much noise as possible .
’ Forster gruntedNONMET .
‘ It had no trouble finding Grant .
I thinkNONMET it's a good idea .
And I'll goNONMET in the suit until we reachMET the ambush point .
Might helpNONMET to drawMET it .
’ They helpedNONMET him kit up , Nell connectingNONMET the leads from the back pack into the suit attachments .
Forster's breathing whistledMET out of the one-way valve .
Behind the clear , wide vizor , he triedNONMET to smileNONMET .
‘ Cosy in here , ’ he jokedNONMET .
‘ Even got my own toilet .
Bloody handy in the circumstances .
’ Delaney tookMET the lead .
It was now light , the lamps on the gangway givingMET murky yellow pools that barely pushed back the inky blackness of a starless night .
At the entrance to the laboratory complex the others drew on their own masks .
Ineffectual or not against lingering gases it seemedNONMET a wise precaution , even if it was only psychological .
Delaney glancedNONMET back at them .
‘ Let's makeMET sure it knowsMET where we are .
’ They madeMET noise ; slammedNONMET doors .
Nell shudderedNONMET .
Were unseen eyes watchingNONMET them ?
Was it even now shadowingMET them , movingNONMET soundlessly from cover to cover , like a tiger in the steel jungle ?
Forster's radio -projected voice brokeMET into her thoughts .
‘ LooksNONMET a good place .
’ He was at the entrance to the secure lab zone .
‘ This must be the only way in , ’ Nell saidNONMET .
Forster was quickly de-suited .
As they set up the now empty suit with its back to the door , half slumped over a control panel , he settled down behind the curtained entrance of the showers .
Delaney's voice was hushed .
‘ Maybe we should leaveNONMET two of us here ?
’ ‘ Don't wantNONMET to rouseMET any suspicions .
Forster was adamant .
‘ After all , it might be able to countNONMET .
’ When he didn't getMET any response , he pattedNONMET the Uzi beside him on the steel floor .
‘ I won't be unprepared like poor old Grant .
’ Delaney pulledNONMET the curtain across , coveringNONMET Forster who cutNONMET a small slit in the opaque green plastic , wideningNONMET it to giveMET himself a better field of view .
Lawton cameNONMET and crouchedNONMET down in front of it .
‘ I've leftMET the suit's radio on full , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ MakeMET it soundNONMET interesting if we talkNONMET occasionally .
’ He hesitatedNONMET .
‘ Good luck .
’ ‘ I feelNONMET like a Maharajah waiting for the tiger to pounce on the tied- up goat , ’ Forster grinnedNONMET .
‘ I hopeNONMET I don't have to waitNONMET all night .
’ Nell shudderedNONMET .
Night .
This was a night in their minds — a creature from the darker side of man's intellect .
Something worriedNONMET her about that thought .
Something hiddenMET behind the more obvious sentiment .
After they'd goneNONMET , Forster feltMET the silence physically settle around him .
He'd never been one to exerciseMET an over- , yet the conditions were like the feeling of a tomb — of an interment .
Would he be foundNONMET , he musedNONMET , a thousand years from then , a dust-covered skeleton ?
He chuckledNONMET .
And the Uzi a primitive weapon , the bio suit mistaken for some sort of ceremonial armour ?
The first stunning silence gaveMET way to the creaking of the ship and a far-off booming of the sea against the hull .
The radio on the dummy suddenly screeched into action as Delaney's distorted voice gaveMET it life .
The thousands of tons of steel madeMET real communication impossible .
His own radio was off .
Forster settled down , only puttingNONMET his eye to the slit every half minute , not continually as he had startedNONMET to do .
He had a good view of the long shadowy main corridor .
The only problem was if — he correctedMET himself — when it cameNONMET , which side turning , if any , would it useMET .
The further away the better .
The more time to seeNONMET it approach .
The trouble was the transverse corridor just outside the room .
If the approach was that way he would getMET no warning at all , and it would be on top of George — his name for the dummy sitting like a drunken son-of-a-bitch — before he knewNONMET it .
If that happenedNONMET , he'd have to workNONMET fast .
What he'd seenNONMET done to Grant madeMET Forster realiseNONMET that whatever it was struckNONMET with demonic speed and savagery .
In seconds , poor old George would be spreadNONMET around the room like an explosion in Harrod's window , and the thing would be away .
Or on him .
As if in protest , George utteredMET a blood-curdling , lunatic-sounding cackle , and fellNONMET fractionally forward .
Forster suppressedNONMET a nervous giggle .
They reachedMET the main deck , droppingNONMET down in a defensive posture , eyes searchingMET the stacked containers , tryingNONMET to probeMET the black , jagged recesses between them .
Lawton scannedNONMET upwards .
‘ It could be anywhere .
Even back on the bridge again .
’ ‘ We should startNONMET in the engine room , ’ Nell suggestedNONMET , shiveringNONMET , ‘ workNONMET up through the crew's quarters , and then into the complex .
’ ConfrontedMET with the need to proceedNONMET , Delaney tookMET risks , plummeting feet first through the hatchways , and partly breakingMET his descent with the handrails , fallingNONMET like a parachutist , rollingNONMET instantly deployingNONMET his Uzi against … Against what ?
Like Forster , all he could guessNONMET was that it was fast .
Grant may have been lame , but … fast or silent ?
Or both ?
The speed of descent must have cutMET down the exposure to any residual gas since he feltMET none of the earlier weirdness as he approachedNONMET the still sealed engine room door .
Pandora's Box ?
He wincedNONMET at the memory as he hammeredNONMET on the steel and then lookedNONMET through the spy port .
In the stroboscopic view , the giant pistons were the only things movingNONMET — until a figure detachedNONMET itself from the wall , its grey colour exactly that of the background steel .
Like a chameleon , it movedNONMET out of the aisle between machines , then stopped , and becameNONMET utterly motionless .
Delaney's stillness caughtMET the attention of the others .
Nell's transceivered voice crackled in his headphones .
‘ What is it ?
’ He didn't wantNONMET to takeMET his eyes from it — equally he wantedNONMET somebody else to seeNONMET it .
To confirmNONMET .
Gently as though he might disturbNONMET it , he pulled back .
‘ TakeMET a look for yourself .
’ She did — and caughtMET her breath .
The creature was large-headed , absurdly so , its body half man , half something lost in the primordial past  .
But there could be no doubt that fundamentally it was … human .
Nell knewNONMET , and not only because she was a female of the same species .
She could seeNONMET in its eyes — intelligence .
And human fear .
But also , as a doctor , she knewNONMET exactly what it was .
She toldNONMET Delaney , who shookNONMET his head with revulsion .
Nell would never restNONMET until she could getNONMET closer to confirmNONMET her worst suspicions , and paradoxically it was the woman in her that provided the intensity of emotion that would letNONMET nothing standMET in her way .
George , the sacrificial dummy , hadn't emittedNONMET a squeak for a long time .
Forster scannedNONMET the corridor once more .
It was empty .
just as it always had been .
He satNONMET back  again , eyeingNONMET the blank wall before him , confident that he'd catchNONMET it , however good it was .
He keptNONMET wonderingNONMET how it had gotMET Silk .
Silk was the meanest , toughest professional he'd ever knownNONMET .
And yet he'd disappearedNONMET , without trace .
Forster was a fatalist .
He shruggedNONMET .
You could be James Bond , he thoughtNONMET , but if something had your number on it … A gentle breeze brokeMET the absolute silence , movingNONMET the curtain so that he had to steadyNONMET it with his hand .
Instantly alertNONMET , Forster checkedNONMET through his spy port .
Nothing .
But a door had openedNONMET somewhere .
Somebody , or something , had enteredNONMET the complex .
It could be the others returningNONMET — or the start of his ambush .
‘ For God's sake leave your mask on .
And that's an order !
’ But Delaney's plea was in vain .
Nell pulledNONMET it off , gotNONMET close to the door , and shoutedNONMET .
‘ We meanNONMET you no harm .
You can helpNONMET us .
’ When she checkedNONMET through the spyhole it was standingNONMET in exactly the same spot , unmoving , like a lizard .
Lawton shookNONMET his head .
‘ Can't hearNONMET you .
TryNONMET the ship's system again .
’ Nell ranNONMET to the wall telephone , and pushedNONMET the digit for engine room .
The small light beneath the receiver rests showedMET that the line was workingMET .
Worried , Delaney followedNONMET , searchingMET her face , fearingNONMET the tell-tale signs of toxicity .
On impulse , and against his better judgment , he pulledNONMET off his own mask .
Nell repeatedly pressedNONMET the button , shoutedNONMET across at Lawton , who was now usingNONMET the spy port .
‘ What's happeningNONMET ?
’ The back of Lawton's head shookNONMET , his radio -projected voice cracklingNONMET .
‘ Nothing now .
The head jerked , just the once , to the left , so I reckonMET it heardNONMET the ‘ phone .
’ He straightened up and came over , directingMET his question at Delaney .
‘ We ought to getNONMET on .
’ Delaney noddedNONMET his agreement .
‘ LeaveNONMET it , Nell .
’ His tone was sharp .
‘ It's not goingNONMET anywhere .
’ She squaredMET up to him , defiantly , ‘ I can't , John .
Don't you seeMET ?
The poor thing is part of this madness .
If we can getNONMET to it , I can learnNONMET so much more .
And in any case , it might dieNONMET if we don't tryNONMET and helpNONMET it … soon .
’ Delaney avertedMET his gaze from her , afraid of what he had seenNONMET in her eyes .
‘ Perhaps it would be better if it did .
’ ‘ You don't meanNONMET that , ’ she saidNONMET , steppingNONMET away from him .
Delaney fiddledMET awkwardly with his mask , preparatory to puttingNONMET it back on again .
‘ For God's sake , Nell .
All I meanNONMET is , we've gotMET a job to do .
And Forster's neck's on the line .
Don't you oweMET it to him to comeNONMET now ?
’ She flushedMET , but heldNONMET on to the ‘ phone .
Obviously strivingNONMET to be as controlled as possible , she smiledNONMET .
‘ You two can manageMET , ’ she saidNONMET calmly .
‘ I can do better here , on my own .
Quietly .
If I succeedNONMET it will unlockMET a lot of the mystery of what's been done on Titron .
And … ’ She falteredNONMET .
‘ … I thinkNONMET we oweMET it to that pathetic creature in there .
’ ‘ Pathetic ?
’ Delaney triedNONMET to play down the fear in his voice — fear for her .
‘ It might be bloody dangerous .
Certainly , something on this ship is .
’ ‘ Not this one , ’ Nell saidNONMET , shakingNONMET her head with some kind of reassurance .
‘ I just knowNONMET .
’ Lawton gesturedNONMET in the gangway .
‘ You may not be at risk from what is in here .
What about out there ?
There's no guarantee that what we're hunting is goingNONMET to followMET the rules .
’ Nell shruggedNONMET .
‘ That's a risk I'll have to takeMET .
I've gotMET a more important job here .
’ Delaney knewNONMET there was no way she would be shiftedMET from her chosen course .
OrderingNONMET her would be ludicrous under the changed circumstances , and in any event , a waste of time .
But Lawton was right .
The risk from the other danger , or dangers of Titron , frightenedNONMET him more .
‘ HelpNONMET me secureMET the stairs behind us , ’ he snappedMET at Lawton , ‘ as much as we can .
’ Delaney turnedNONMET to Nell .
‘ It might buyMET you the time you needNONMET .
But takeMET care .
Don't be bloody foolish like I am , leavingNONMET you here .
EstablishNONMET contact if you can .
No more at this stage .
UnderstandNONMET ?
And don't tryNONMET and getNONMET the door open .
’ But Nell was hardly listening .
To pleaseNONMET him she noddedNONMET , then despite Lawton's presence , squeezedNONMET Delaney's arm .
‘ And you .
’ She smiledNONMET .
‘ Watch out .
’ Reluctantly , Delaney madeMET for the gangway .
Lawton had already shiftedNONMET some chairs , in readiness to formNONMET a barricade .
He gaveMET him a hand with a large oil drum , and then another , as Nell , tearingMET herself from her appointed task , dragged over a bench .
As they drew back up the stairs , pilingNONMET on the pieces she threwNONMET up at them , Lawton sniffedNONMET .
‘ This won't holdMET anything .
Just slow it down .
’ Like Forster before her , Nell indicatedNONMET her pistol and grenades .
‘ As long as there's ti me , that's all we needNONMET .
’ As they descendedNONMET the stairs , Delaney pausedNONMET , and tookMET a last look down at her .
She smiledNONMET shyly , then turned away .
In a sense , as long as he could convinceNONMET himself that she was safe , he was glad she wasn't comingNONMET with them .
Whatever it was they were after , it was an unknown quantity , unknown , that is , except for a lethal ferocity .
He pulledNONMET on his respirator , his mind madeMET up to getNONMET back to her as soon as he could , for Nell Anderson was all he caredNONMET about now .
There it wentNONMET again .
Forster frownedNONMET as he lookedNONMET through his spy hole .
A sound .
He couldn't placeMET it , but it remindedNONMET him strongly of something .
The corridor was empty .
It had happenedNONMET three times now .
A hissing , We gasNONMET escaping , endingNONMET with a funny little squeak .
He lookedNONMET at George , wonderingNONMET if the sound had comeMET from him .
Satisfied that everything was as it should be , he checkedNONMET his watch .
Well over half an hour had passedMET .
They ought to be near him soon .
Forster searchedNONMET in a pouch and cameNONMET up with a glucose sweet .
Quietly he unwrapped the covering paper , then pausedNONMET , as some instinct madeMET him checkNONMET again .
As he did so , the sound cameMET nearer ; louder .
His intense scrutiny tookMET in the shadowy and empty lengths of the corridor .
Apart from some dark patches on the wall that he hadn't noticedNONMET before , there was nothing to seeNONMET .
His gaze cameMET back to George , still sprawledNONMET over the control desk .
A fly landed on the empty , staringMET vizor , and crawled across it .
Forster was sorely temptedNONMET to nipMET out and confirmNONMET that the noise was comingMET from George by twiddlingNONMET the volume and tuner , but foughtMET down the urge .
He satNONMET back , pulledNONMET off his mask , and poppedMET the sweet into his mouth .
It tookMET him only seconds to noticeNONMET the smell .
Forster chokedNONMET as the putrefying reek seemedNONMET to getNONMET right into him .
Frightened that it was a gas pocket , he fumbledNONMET with his mask , and finally got it back on .
His heart was thumping .
Nothing seemedNONMET to be happeningNONMET , all his senses were apparently functioningNONMET normally , except … that the sweet in his mouth seemedNONMET permeated with the awful smell ; had becomeNONMET a slimy lump of filth .
He had to getNONMET ridNONMET of it .
Forster reachedNONMET for his mask , just as the hissing gas noise sounded right on top of him , endingNONMET with a little shriek .
He knewNONMET then where he'd heardNONMET something similar before .
It was like a man breathingNONMET through a respiratory system , with some sort of one-way valve .
A shadow fellMET across the wall opposite , as slowly , and fearfully he turnedNONMET .
The curtain was a dense , opaque greenish-yellow , and something was right behind it , a shape pressingNONMET against the humped plastic standing there lookingNONMET down at him , half seenNONMET , half imagined .
His hand wentMET out , reachedMET for the submachine gun , his fingers tighteningMET on the stock .
With a blood-curdling growl , the curtain was snatchedNONMET aside .
Forster half rolled , his Uzi tremblingMET in his hand as he gotMET off half a clip at point blank range .
But it struck with the speed of an attacking snake .
And something else ; something he sawNONMET as the curtain toreNONMET away and he lookedNONMET into the depths of the unbelievable face above him , fractionally dulledNONMET his reflexes .
Friday 16 September to Tuesday 20 September Once free of the knotted tentacles of the eastern suburbs , Dalgliesh madeMET good time and by three he was drivingNONMET through Lydsett village .
Here a right turn tookMET him off the coastal road on to what was little more than a smoothly macadamed track borderedNONMET by water-filled ditches and fringed by a golden haze of reeds , their lumbered heads strainingMET in the wind .
And now , for the first time , he thoughtNONMET that he could smellNONMET the North Sea , that potent but half- tang evokingNONMET nostalgic memories of childhood holidays , of solitary adolescent walks as he struggledMET with his first poems , of his aunt's tall figure at his side , binoculars round her neck , stridingNONMET towards the haunts of her beloved birds .
And here , barringMET the road , was the familiar old farm gate still in place .
Its continued presence always surprisedMET him since it servedMET no purpose that he could seeMET except symbolically to cut off the headland and to giveMET travellers pause to considerNONMET whether they really wantedNONMET to continueNONMET .
It swungNONMET open at his touch but closingNONMET it , as always , was more difficult and he luggedNONMET and half liftedNONMET it into place and slippedNONMET the circle of wire over the gatepost with a familiar sensation of having turnedMET his back on the workaday world and enteredNONMET country which , no matter how frequent his visits , would always be alien territory .
He was driving now across the open headland towards the fringe of pine trees which borderedNONMET the North Sea .
The only house to his left was the old Victorian rectory , a square , red-brick building , incongruous behind its struggling hedge of rhododendron and laurel .
To his right the ground roseMET gently towards the southern cliffs and he could seeNONMET the dark mouth of a concrete pillbox , undemolished since the war , and as seemingly indestructible as the great hulks of wave -battered concrete , remnants of the old fortifications which layMET half -submerged in the sand along part of the beach .
To the north the broken arches and stumps of the ruined Benedictine abbey gleamedNONMET golden in the afternoon sun against the crinkled blue of the sea and , breastingNONMET a small ridge , he glimpsedNONMET for the first time the topsail of Larksoken Mill and beyond it , against the skyline , the great grey bulk of Larksoken Nuclear power Station .
The road he was on , veeringMET left , would leadMET eventually to the station but was , he knewNONMET , seldom usedNONMET since normal traffic and all heavy vehicles usedMET the new access road to the north .
The headland was empty and almost bare , the few straggling trees , distortedNONMET by the wind , struggled to keepMET their precarious hold in the uncompromising soil .
And now he was passingNONMET a second and more dilapidated pillbox and it struckMET him that the whole headland had the desolate look of an old battlefield , the corpses long since cartedNONMET away but the air vibratingMET still with the gunfire of long-lost battles , while the power station loomedNONMET over it like a grandiose modern monument to the unknown dead .
On his previous visits to Larksoken he had seenNONMET Martyr's Cottage spread out beneath him when he and his aunt had stoodNONMET surveyingNONMET the headland from the small top room under the cone of the mill .
But he had never been closer to it than the road and now , drivingNONMET up it , it struckMET him again that the description ‘ cottage ’ was hardly appropriate .
It was a substantial , two-storey , L-shaped house standing to the east of the track with walls partly flint and partly renderedNONMET , enclosingNONMET at the rear a courtyard of York stone which gaveMET an uninterrupted view over fifty yards of scrub to the grassy dunes and the sea .
No one appearedNONMET as he drew up and , before liftingNONMET his hand to the bell , he pausedNONMET to readNONMET the words of a stone plaque embeddedNONMET in the flints to the right of the door .
In a cottage on this site livedNONMET Agnes Poley , Protestant martyr , burned at Ipswich , 15th August 1557 , aged 32 years .
Ecclesiastes chapter 3 , verse 15 .
The plaque was unadorned , the letters deeply carvedNONMET in an elegant script reminiscent of Eric Gill , and Dalgliesh rememberedNONMET his aunt tellingNONMET him that it had been placedNONMET there by previous owners in the late twenties , when the cottage was originally extendedNONMET .
One of the advantages of a religious education is the ability to identifyNONMET at least the better-known texts of scripture and this was one which it neededNONMET no effort of memory to recallMET .
As a delinquent nine-year-old at his prep school , he had once been requiredNONMET by the headmaster to write out in his best handwriting the whole of the third chapter of Ecclesiastes , old Gumboil , economical in this as in all matters , believingNONMET that writing lines should combineMET punishment with literary and religious education .
The words , in that round childish script , had remainedMET with him .
It was , he thoughtNONMET , an interesting choice of text .
That which hath been is now ; and that which is to be hath already been ; and God requirethNONMET that which is past .
He rangNONMET and there was only a short delay before Alice Mair openedNONMET the door .
He sawNONMET a tall , handsome woman dressedNONMET with careful and expensive informality in a black cashmere sweater with a silk scarf at the throat and fawn trousers .
He would have recognizedNONMET her from her strong resemblance to her brother , although she lookedNONMET the elder by some years .
She tookMET it for grantedNONMET that each knewNONMET who the other was , and standingNONMET aside to motionNONMET him in she saidNONMET : ‘ It's good of you to be so accommodating , Mr Dalgliesh .
I'm afraid Nora Gurney is implacable .
Once she knewNONMET you were on your way to Norfolk you were a predestined victim .
Perhaps you would bringNONMET the proofs through to the kitchen .
’ It was a distinguished face with the deep-set , widely spacedNONMET eyes beneath straight brows , a well-shaped , rather secretive mouth and strong greying hair swept upwards and curled into a chignon .
In her publicity photographs she could , he recalledMET , look beautiful in a somewhat intimidating , intellectual and very English mould .
But seenNONMET face to face , even in the informality of her own house , the absence of a spark of sexuality and , he sensedNONMET , a deep-seated reserve , madeMET her seemNONMET less feminine and more formidable than he had expectedNONMET , and she heldMET herself stiffly as if repellingMET invaders of her personal space .
The handshake with which she had greetedNONMET him had been cool and firm and her brief smile was surprisingly attractive .
He knewNONMET that he was oversensitive to the timbre of the human voice and hers , although not jarringMET or unpleasant , soundedNONMET a little forcedNONMET as if she were deliberately speakingNONMET at an unnatural pitch .
He followedNONMET her down the hall to the kitchen at the back of the house .
It was , he judgedNONMET , almost twenty feet long and obviously served the triple purpose of sitting room , working place and office .
The right-hand half of the room was a well-equipped kitchen with a large gas stove and an Aga , a butcher's chopping block , a dresser to the right of the door holdingMET an assortment of gleaming pots , and a long working surface with a wooden triangle sheathingMET her assortment of knives .
In the centre of the room was a large wooden table holdingMET a stoneware jar of dried flowers .
On the left-hand wall was a working fireplace , the two recesses fittedMET with wall-to-ceiling bookshelves .
To each side of the hearth was a high -backed wicker armchair in an intricate closely woven design fittedMET with patchwork cushions .
There was an open roll-top desk facingNONMET one of the wide windows and , to its right , a stable door , the top half openNONMET , gaveMET a view of the paved courtyard .
Dalgliesh could glimpseNONMET what was obviously her herb garden plantedNONMET in elegant terracotta pots carefully disposedNONMET to catchMET the sun .
The room , which containedNONMET nothing superfluous , nothing pretentious , was both pleasing and extraordinarily comforting and , for a moment , he wonderedNONMET why .
Was it the faint smell of herbs and newly baked dough , the soft ticking of the wall- mounted clock which seemedNONMET both to markMET the passing seconds and yet to holdMET time in thrall , the rhythmic moaning of the sea through the half-open door , the sense of well-fed ease conveyedMET by the two cushioned armchairs , the open hearth ?
Or was it that the kitchen remindedNONMET Dalgliesh of that rectory kitchen where the lonely only child had foundMET warmth and undemanding , uncensorious companionship , been givenNONMET hot dripping toast and small forbidden treats ?
He placedNONMET the proofs on the desk , refusedNONMET Alice Mair's offer of coffee and followedNONMET her back to the front door .
She walkedNONMET out with him to the car and saidNONMET : ‘ I was sorry about your aunt — sorry for you , I meanNONMET .
I expectNONMET that for an ornithologist death ceasesNONMET to be terrible once sight and hearing beginNONMET to goMET .
And to dieNONMET in one's sleep without distress to oneself or inconvenience to others is an enviable end .
But you had knownNONMET her for so long that she must have seemedNONMET immortal .
’ Formal condolences , he thoughtNONMET , were never easy to speakNONMET or acceptNONMET and usually sounded either banal or insincere .
Hers had been perceptive .
Jane Dalgliesh had indeed seemedNONMET to him immortal .
The very old , he thoughtNONMET , makeMET our past .
Once they goNONMET it seemsNONMET for a moment that neither it nor we have any real existence .
He saidNONMET : ‘ I don't thinkNONMET death was ever terrible to her .
I'm not sure that I really knewNONMET her and I'm left wishingNONMET I'd triedNONMET harder .
But I shall missNONMET her .
’ Alice Mair saidNONMET : ‘ I didn't knowNONMET her either .
Perhaps I should have triedNONMET harder too .
She was a very private woman , I suspectNONMET one of those fortunate people who findMET no other company more agreeable than their own .
It always seemsNONMET presumptuous to encroachMET on that self-sufficiency .
Perhaps you shareMET it .
But if you can tolerateNONMET company , I'm having a few people , mostly colleagues of Alex from the power station , to dinner on Thursday night .
Would you careNONMET to joinNONMET us ?
Seven thirty for eight .
’ It soundedNONMET , he thoughtNONMET , more like a challenge than an invitation .
Somewhat to his surprise , Dalgliesh foundMET himself acceptingNONMET .
But then the whole encounter had been a little surprising .
She stoodNONMET regarding him with a serious intensity as he letNONMET in the clutch and turnedNONMET the car and he had the impression that she was watchingNONMET critically to seeNONMET how he handledMET it .
But at least , he thoughtNONMET as he gaveMET a final wave , she hadn't askedNONMET him whether he had comeNONMET to Norfolk to helpNONMET catchNONMET the Whistler .
Three minutes later he raisedNONMET his foot from the accelerator .
Ahead of him , trudgingNONMET along on the left of the path , was a little group of children , the eldest girl wheelingNONMET a pushchair with two smaller children , one each side of her , clutchingNONMET the bars .
HearingNONMET the noise of the car she turnedNONMET and he sawNONMET a peaked , delicate face framed with red- gold hair .
He recognizedNONMET the Blaney children , metNONMET once before with their mother walking along the beach .
Obviously the eldest girl had been shoppingNONMET : the folding pushchair had a shelf under the seat lumpedNONMET high with plastic bags .
Instinctively he slowed down .
They were unlikely to be in real danger , the Whistler stalkedNONMET at night , not in broad daylight , and no vehicle had passedNONMET him since he leftNONMET the coastal road .
But the child looked grossly overburdened and ought not to be so far from home .
Though he had never seenNONMET their cottage he seemedNONMET to rememberNONMET that his aunt had toldNONMET him that it layMET about two miles to the south .
He recalledMET what he knewNONMET about them , that their father earnedNONMET a precarious living as a painter whose innocuous , prettified watercolours were soldNONMET in cafés and tourist shops along the coast and that their mother had been desperately ill with cancer .
He wonderedNONMET whether Mrs Blaney was still alive .
His instinct was to pileNONMET the children into the car and driveNONMET them home but that , he knewNONMET , was hardly sensible .
Almost certainly the eldest child — Theresa , wasn't it ?
— had been taughtNONMET not to acceptNONMET lifts from strangers , particularly men , and he was virtually a stranger .
On an impulse he reversedNONMET the Jaguar and droveNONMET quickly back to Martyr's Cottage .
This time the front door was open and a swathe of sunlight layMET across the red-tiled floor .
Alice Mair had heardNONMET the car and cameNONMET out to him from the kitchen , wipingNONMET her hands .
He saidNONMET : ‘ The Blaney children are walkingNONMET home .
Theresa is wheelingNONMET a pushchair and tryingNONMET to copeNONMET with the twins .
I thoughtNONMET I could offerNONMET a lift if I had a woman with me , someone they knowNONMET .
’ She saidNONMET briefly : ‘ They knowNONMET me .
’ Without another word she wentNONMET back into the kitchen then cameNONMET out to him , closedNONMET the front door after her without lockingNONMET it and got into the car .
PuttingNONMET it into gear , his arm brushedMET her knee .
He was aware of an almost imperceptible withdrawing , more emotional than physical , a small delicate gesture of self-containment .
Dalgliesh doubtedNONMET whether that half- recoil had anything to do with him personally , nor did he findMET her silence disconcerting .
Their conversation , when they did speakNONMET , was brief .
He askedNONMET : ‘ Is Mrs Blaney still alive ?
’ ‘ No .
She diedNONMET six weeks ago .
’ ‘ How are they managing ?
’ ‘ Not particularly well , I imagineNONMET .
But Ryan Blaney doesn't welcomeMET interference .
I sympathizeNONMET .
Once he letsMET down his defences half the social workers in Norfolk , amateur and professional , will moveMET in on him .
’ When they drew up beside the little band it was Alice Mair who openedNONMET the car door and spokeNONMET .
‘ Theresa , here is Mr Dalgliesh to giveMET you all a lift .
He's Miss Dalgliesh's nephew from Larksoken Mill .
One of the twins had better sitNONMET on my lap .
The rest of you and the pushchair can fitNONMET into the back .
’ Theresa lookedNONMET at Dalgliesh without smilingNONMET and saidNONMET a grave thankNONMET you .
She remindedNONMET him of pictures of the young Elizabeth Tudor , the same red- gold hair framingMET a curiously adult face both secretive and self-composed , the same sharp nose and wary eyes .
The faces of the twins , softer editions of her own , turned towards her questioningly then brokeMET into shy smiles .
They lookedNONMET as if they had been dressedNONMET in a hurry and not very suitably for a long walk on the headland , even in a warm autumn .
One woreNONMET a tattered summer dress in pink spotted cotton with double flounces , the other a pinafore over a checked blouse .
Their pathetically thin legs were unprotected .
Theresa was wearingNONMET jeans and a grubby sweat shirt with a map of London's Underground across the front .
Dalgliesh foundMET himself wonderingNONMET if it had been broughtNONMET back from a school trip to the capital .
It was too large for her and the wide sleeves of limp cotton hung from her freckled arms like rags thrown over a stick .
In contrast to his sisters , Anthony was overMET , a bundle of leggings , jumper and a padded jacket topped with a woollen helmet with a bobble pulled well down over his forehead , beneath which he surveyedNONMET their busyness , unsmiling , like a stout imperious Caesar .
Dalgliesh gotNONMET out of the Jaguar and triedNONMET to extricateNONMET him from the pushchair , but the anatomy of the chair momentarily defeated him .
There was a bar beneath which the child's rigid legs were obstinately stuck .
The solid uncooperative bundle was surprisingly heavy ; it was like trying to manoeuvre a firm and rather smelly poultice .
Theresa gaveMET him a brief , pitying smile , draggedNONMET the plastic bags from beneath the seat then expertly freed her brother and settledNONMET him on her left hip while , with the other hand , she collapsedMET the pushchair , with a single vigorous shake .
Dalgliesh tookNONMET the baby from her while Theresa helpedNONMET the children into the Jaguar and commanded with sudden fierceness , ‘ SitNONMET still .
’ Anthony , recognizingNONMET incompetence , graspedNONMET Dalgliesh's hair firmly with a sticky hand and he feltNONMET the momentary touch of a cheek , so soft that it was like the fall of a petal .
Throughout these manoeuvrings Alice Mair satNONMET quietly watchingNONMET from the car but madeNONMET no move to helpNONMET .
It was impossible to knowNONMET what she was thinkingNONMET .
But once the Jaguar had movedNONMET away she turnedNONMET to Theresa and saidNONMET in a voice of surprising gentleness : ‘ Does your father knowNONMET that you're out alone ?
’ ‘ Daddy has takenNONMET the van to Mr Sparks .
It's due for its MOT test .
Mr Sparks doesn't thinkNONMET it's goingNONMET to passMET .
And I foundMET we'd runMET out two lexical units; [run out]=phrasal verb milk for Anthony .
We have to have milk .
And we wantedNONMET some more disposable nappies .
’ Alice Mair saidNONMET : ‘ I'm givingMET a dinner party on Thursday evening .
If your father agreesNONMET , would you likeNONMET to comeNONMET and helpNONMET with the table like you did last month ?
’ ‘ What are you goingNONMET to cookNONMET , Miss Mair ?
‘ ‘ PutNONMET your head closeNONMET so that I can whisperNONMET .
Mr Dalgliesh is goingNONMET to be one of the guests .
I wantNONMET it to be a surprise .
‘ The pale golden head leaned forward towards the grey and Miss Mair whisperedNONMET .
Theresa smiledNONMET and then noddedNONMET with serious satisfaction in a moment of grave feminine conspiracy .
But next morning Ruth awakenedNONMET early and , leavingNONMET Miss Beard to her gentle dreams , dressedNONMET quickly and hurried out of the house .
It was another golden day .
She still retainedMET her English habit of notingMET each day's weather , always expectingNONMET changes , marvellingNONMET at the hot sunny days which followedMET one after the other , almost with monotony .
When she reachedNONMET the plateau she remainedNONMET standing , watchingNONMET for Joss Barnet , waitingNONMET for the moment when she would seeNONMET him ridingNONMET towards her .
There was no longer any need for her to be ‘ discoveredMET ’ .
Her sole purpose in being there was to meetNONMET him and she was content that he should knowNONMET it .
He was late this morning .
Or was she earlier than she thoughtNONMET ?
Had she misjudgedMET the time ?
No matter .
She was happy to waitNONMET for him , certain that soon she would seeNONMET him ridingNONMET towards her .
Then as the minutes passedMET and there was no sign of him , she consideredMET that perhaps he had overslept .
It could happenNONMET .
Or had his horse goneNONMET lame , castNONMET a shoe ?
She satNONMET down and prepared to waitNONMET as long as was necessary .
She knewNONMET that in the end he would comeNONMET .
After a few more minutes she becameNONMET restless , and stoodNONMET up again , her eyes searchingMET the slope of the hillside and the valley below , tryingMET to determineNONMET whether some small movement down there was a man on horseback or merely a trick of her imagination .
Should she set off down the hill to meetNONMET him ?
But perhaps he would comeNONMET by another route and then she would missMET him .
At the end of what she reckonedMET must be an hour , she facedMET the fact that he was not comingNONMET .
She droppedNONMET to the ground again and layNONMET down , buryingMET her face in the sweet- grass .
She had been mistakenNONMET ever to thinkNONMET that he would comeNONMET .
She had letMET her overwhelming desire feedMET her imagination ; had readMET something into his words , his looks , his actions , which had not been there at all .
Her face burned with the shame of it .
Such was the feeling Joss Barnet had arousedMET in her , that not for one moment did it occurNONMET to her to blameNONMET him for anything .
It was all her fault .
Sick at heart , she weptNONMET .
Then she driedNONMET her eyes on the hem of her petticoat and wentNONMET slowly back to the house .
‘ So you've decidedNONMET to putMET in an appearance ?
’ Cook saidNONMET .
‘ I do seemNONMET to recallMET something about you offeringNONMET to helpNONMET me with the party preparations .
But of course if you've changedMET your mind … ’ ‘ I haven't , ’ Ruth snappedMET .
‘ I'm ready to startNONMET now .
I don't wantNONMET any breakfast .
’ ‘ Hoity-toity !
What's the matter with everyone this morning ?
’ Cook demandedNONMET .
‘ There's Sean O'Farrell and the master left in a hurry this hour past for New York City , both without a bite inside them — and now you .
’ ‘ GoneNONMET to New York ?
’ ‘ That's what I saidNONMET .
’ With Mrs Cranbrook's words Ruth's appetite immediately returnedMET .
So he had not failedNONMET her after all !
How could she have thoughtNONMET that he would ?
Something unforeseen and urgent had happenedNONMET , since Sean had obviously knownNONMET of it yesterday afternoon , and there had been no opportunity for him to informNONMET her .
Relief surgedMET through her like a physical infusion of new blood .
‘ I've changedMET my mind , ’ she saidNONMET .
‘ I would likeNONMET some breakfast .
Suddenly I'm hungry .
When will they be back ?
’ ‘ Sean ?
How should I knowNONMET ?
I don't understandNONMET business .
What I do understandNONMET is that if the master's not home for the party tomorrow , the mistress won't be pleased — and that's puttingMET it mildly .
Don't you dawdleNONMET over your breakfast then , not if you intendNONMET to makeMET yourself useful .
There's plenty to be done .
’ Ruth workedNONMET all that day as though she had the strength of ten .
They preparedNONMET chicken pies , the pastry as light as Ruth's heart , turtle soup , a haunch of venison , jellies , blancmanges , syllabubs , trifles , and a host of other dishes , with still more to be done on the day of the party itself .
Mrs Cranbrook unbentNONMET so far as to showMET approval .
‘ You've done very well , ’ she concededMET .
Mrs Carson , knowingNONMET how much was involvedNONMET , had excusedNONMET Ruth from all other duties until Anna's bedtime hour .
And now it approachedMET .
She took off the voluminous apron Cook had lentNONMET her and wentNONMET in search of her charge .
Anna was in tears .
‘ We're goingNONMET home , ’ she sobbedNONMET .
‘ I don't wantNONMET to goNONMET back  to Mrs Gutermann's .
I wantNONMET to stayNONMET with Edward .
I wantNONMET to liveNONMET with him for ever and ever !
’ Ruth could thinkNONMET of few worse fates , but her stomach lurchedMET at the thought of leavingNONMET Millfield .
‘ How do you knowNONMET we're leavingNONMET ?
’ she askedNONMET .
‘ Who toldNONMET you ?
’ ‘ Miss Fitch , ’ Anna wailedNONMET .
‘ I don't likeNONMET Miss Fitch .
I hateNONMET her !
I daresayNONMET she wantsNONMET me to goNONMET !
’ ‘ Perhaps she's mistaken , ’ Ruth saidNONMET , though she doubtedNONMET if Miss Fitch was ever wrong .
‘ We'll askNONMET your mama the moment she comes in .
’ ‘ I'm afraid it's true , ’ Mrs Carson toldNONMET them .
‘ Of course we were only invitedNONMET for ten days or so .
’ Ruth had lostMET count of time .
To her , the long summer days had stretchedMET ahead , world without end .
‘ We are goingNONMET to leaveNONMET on Sunday , ’ Mrs Carson wentMET on .
‘ Not too early in the day , since I daresayNONMET we shall all be tired after tomorrow's party .
’ ‘ Anna tellsNONMET me she never wantsNONMET to leaveNONMET Edward , ’ Ruth saidNONMET after the child had goneMET to sleep .
Mrs Carson smiledNONMET indulgently .
‘ Dearest Anna !
She's a little young for a holiday infatuation , but we all have them sooner or later .
ThankNONMET goodness they never lastMET !
And the more intense they are , the shorter the duration , so Anna should soon be over it .
’ ‘ Will Mr Barnet be back for the party ?
’ Ruth askedNONMET .
‘ I expect you meanNONMET will O'Farrell be back , ’ Mrs Carson saidNONMET .
‘ And the answer is , I don't knowNONMET .
Mrs Barnet tellsNONMET me that she expectsNONMET her husband when she seesNONMET him .
It's a fact that American men seemNONMET to putMET business before everything .
ThankNONMET goodness Englishmen are not like that !
’ Next morning Ruth was down in the kitchen early , eagerly hopingNONMET to findNONMET Sean there .
He could well have returnedNONMET late at night and she not heardNONMET him , though she had stayedNONMET awake for a long time , listeningNONMET for the sound of the horses , the carriage wheels on the drive .
There was no sign of Sean but Mrs Cranbrook was already at work .
‘ I hopeNONMET you're ready to helpNONMET me , ’ she saidNONMET .
‘ Everybody is busy with this and that — as if food wasn't the most important thing !
’ ‘ I'll helpNONMET , Mrs Cranbrook , ’ Ruth agreedNONMET .
‘ They're not back then ?
’ She triedNONMET to soundNONMET nonchalant .
‘ Not back ?
Oh , you meanNONMET O'Farrell and the master ?
Not that I knowNONMET of .
There's no telling when they ‘ U return .
Sometimes they're goneNONMET for three or four days at a time .
’ ‘ But surely … with the party ?
’ Mrs Cranbrook shruggedNONMET .
‘ He's a law unto himself , the master .
Not for the likes of you and me to questionNONMET why .
’ The heart had goneNONMET  out of  the day .
Ruth fetchedNONMET and carried and stirred and whippedNONMET , prayingNONMET every moment that Joss Barnet would returnNONMET before they leftNONMET Millfield next day .
But when the day had draggedMET to evening — in spite of all there was to do the time now passed slowly — and still there was no sign of the two men , she beganNONMET to loseMET hope .
In the evening , bone-tired , she leftNONMET the kitchen and wentNONMET to putNONMET a reluctant Anna to bed .
Then she turnedMET to helpingNONMET Mrs Carson .
She brushedNONMET her mistress's hair and piledNONMET it on top of her head in a cluster of curls , carefully and meticulously arrangedNONMET to lookNONMET quite casual .
It was a style Ruth had devisedNONMET herself and Mrs Carson was delighted with the result .
‘ It looksNONMET so different , ’ she saidNONMET .
‘ You really are quite clever at this , Ruth .
And now for my dress .
’ She lookedNONMET beautiful in the yellow satin , the low-cut bodice tight against her slight figure , the skirt billowingNONMET out .
But Ruth had no heart either to appreciateNONMET or to envyNONMET her mistress .
Her spirits were at their lowest ebb .
Mrs Carson gaveMET her maid a sharp , compassionate look .
She thoughtNONMET she knewNONMET the cause of this mood and in a way she was glad to seeNONMET it .
At least it showedMET that the girl's mind was workingMET in the right direction .
‘ Don't worryNONMET , Ruth , ’ she saidNONMET kindly .
‘ I dare sayNONMET O'Farrell will be back tomorrow before we leaveNONMET .
And if not , there is always New York when the Barnets return in the fall .
And now I shan't needNONMET you again this evening , so apart from looking in on Anna from time to time , you may do just as you please .
’ Had she not been so downheartedNONMET Ruth would have enjoyedNONMET herself .
But she had given up all hope of Joss Barnet returningNONMET that evening and nothing else in the world mattered .
The party scene was pretty enough .
Coloured lanterns hung in the trees which fringedNONMET the lawn and bordered the lake beyond .
Torchlights , flaringMET against the night sky and reflected in the water , had been set up wherever it was suitable .
Already the orchestra had begunNONMET to playNONMET and the elegantly dressedNONMET to appearNONMET .
Ruth had no heart for it .
She climbedNONMET the stairs to her room , then undressedNONMET and wentNONMET to bed , wettingNONMET the pillow with her tears which , heldNONMET back all day , now flowedNONMET unchecked .
Her only comfort was not to have Miss Beard in her room , to be able to sufferNONMET in solitude .
Though she thoughtNONMET sleep would never comeMET , eventually it did .
She fellMET asleep to the sound of music driftingMET upwards from the drawing-room .
When she wakenedNONMET it was still dark , the orchestra still playingNONMET , though it was not that which had arousedNONMET her .
PenetratingMET her sleep she had heardNONMET the faint click of the door latch , and then the familiar squeak of the hinge as the door to her room slowly opened .
She raisedNONMET herself on one elbow , blinkingNONMET her eyes , tryingNONMET to seeNONMET in the darkness .
But enough light cameMET from the landing on to which the door opened to silhouetteNONMET the man standing there .
It was Joss Barnet .
Shock madeMET her cry out , and he closedNONMET the door and moved towards her in quick strides , puttingNONMET his hand across her mouth to stop-her scream .
Then he satNONMET on her bed and , without a word from either of them , she wentNONMET willingly into his arms and was heldNONMET close in his embrace .
She feltNONMET his heart beatingMET strong and fast against hers .
They stayedNONMET like that for a long moment and then he saidNONMET , ‘ Light the candle .
’ ‘ I can't , ’ she whisperedNONMET .
‘ Someone will seeNONMET the light under the door .
’ ‘ No matter if they do , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ They will not thinkNONMET of me here .
Only my coachman knowsNONMET I am home .
I have not yet joinedMET the party .
’ ‘ You cameNONMET to me first ?
’ She could hardly believeNONMET it .
He would not tellNONMET her , this funny bewitching little English girl , that he had comeNONMET to her first because he could not keepNONMET away from her .
She had been on his mind since the morning he had seenNONMET her from his horse ; frightened yet defiant , sparkingMET with anger .
Almost , but not quite , she had comeNONMET between him and the work he had had to do in New York City .
The moment the work was done he had orderedMET his coachman to driveNONMET him back to Millfield as fast as the horses would goNONMET .
‘ Light the candle , ’ he repeatedNONMET .
Ruth's fingers trembledMET as she obeyedNONMET him .
Then she layNONMET back on her pillow and they lookedNONMET at each other as if it was for the first time .
He tracedNONMET the contours of her face with gentle fingers , outliningNONMET the curve of her mouth , strokingNONMET her temples .
Without any hurry , in spite of the impatience which had broughtMET him here , he caressedNONMET the length of her neck and the slope of her shoulders .
From out of nowhere , Ruth rememberedNONMET Dick Parker : but not , this time , the pleasure of her union with him , only the pain it had broughtMET her on the Christmas Eve following .
And now although her whole body criedMET out for fulfilment and she longedNONMET for Joss Barnet to completeNONMET what he had surely comeNONMET to do , she knewNONMET that she must not letNONMET it happenNONMET .
She turnedNONMET her face away from him , pushedNONMET his hand from her .
‘ No !
’ she criedNONMET .
‘ You must not !
’ He gaveMET not the slightest sign of having heardNONMET her , continuing to strokeNONMET her neck , and now insertingNONMET his fingers under the neckline of her nightshift .
She triedNONMET again to pushNONMET him away .
‘ Please !
Please don't !
’ she criedNONMET .
It was surprise which madeMET him stopNONMET for a second .
He smiledNONMET at her , an unexpectedly tender smile .
‘ I won't hurtNONMET you , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ Don't be afraid .
’ ‘ I'm not afraid of being hurtNONMET .
’ ‘ Then what … ?
’ ‘ I'm afraid of afterwards , ’ she saidNONMET hesitantly .
‘ If I were to have a child .
It would be the end of the world for me .
’ ‘ But you won't , ’ he assuredNONMET her .
‘ I'll seeMET to that .
I'm not totally callous .
’ ‘ You promiseNONMET ?
’ ‘ I promiseNONMET .
’ She layNONMET quiescent and feltNONMET his strong fingers , quicker now , move to unfastenNONMET the buttons of her shift one by one .
And when he had undoneNONMET her gown , and had difficulty in liftingNONMET it over her head , she raisedNONMET herself from the pillow and helpedNONMET him to take it off .
Then he pulled down the sheet , which was all the bedclothes she had neededNONMET on that warm night , and she layNONMET naked before him .
She observedNONMET him without shame as he lookedNONMET at every part of her .
Her pleasure was in him , and in his delight of her .
When , at last , he strippedMET off his clothes and cameNONMET into her , it was as if this was the moment to which all her life had been leading .
He was a skilful lover : tender and gentle in the beginning , then powerful , persistent , roughMET almost — until , his passion risingMET in harmony with hers , the climax cameMET like the bursting of a thousand stars , like the beginning and ending of the world .
Afterwards they layNONMET quietly side by side , not speakingNONMET , until he saidNONMET , ‘ I must goNONMET .
’ ‘ Not yet , ’ she beggedNONMET .
‘ You can't leaveNONMET me yet .
’ She turnedNONMET over and layNONMET on top of him , tryingNONMET to pin him down with her own slight weight , and he beganNONMET to fondleNONMET her and she him , and almost at once they were makingMET love again .
‘ You are a sorceress , ’ he toldNONMET her when it was all over .
‘ An enchantress .
Women as tempting as you should be keptNONMET out of the sight of mortal men .
’ ‘ You're not a mortal man , ’ Ruth saidNONMET .
‘ You're a god !
’ He laughedNONMET out loud .
‘ Hush !
’ she cautionedNONMET .
‘ Someone will hearNONMET you .
’ ‘ I'm a real man all right , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ As I've just provedNONMET to you .
And would again if time allowed .
’ Then he stood up and quickly beganNONMET to dressNONMET .
‘ I must goNONMET and do my duty as a host for what's left of the night .
’ ‘ Don't leaveNONMET me , ’ she beggedNONMET .
‘ Please stayNONMET !
’ He lookedNONMET at her in surprise , spokeNONMET brusquely .
‘ But of course I must goNONMET .
There's no question .
’ Long afterwards Ruth realisedNONMET that this was the moment when she had learnedNONMET that she could never comeMET first with him .
However much he might desireNONMET her , she would have no more than the allotted space in his life .
‘ When am I goingNONMET to seeNONMET you again ?
’ she askedNONMET .
That , also , was the wrong thing to sayNONMET .
‘ I can't makeMET plans , ’ he saidNONMET sharply .
‘ But we leaveNONMET tomorrow !
’ she exclaimedNONMET .
That tookMET him by  surprise .
‘ The deuce you do !
Well I shall seeMET to that .
My wife will extendMET the invitation to the Carsons .
I takeMET it they're not promisedNONMET elsewhere ?
’ ‘ Oh no , ’ Ruth saidNONMET .
‘ We're goingNONMET back to New York City .
’ He finishedNONMET dressingNONMET , then cameNONMET and heldNONMET her by the shoulders , kissingNONMET her lightly on the mouth .
As he was leavingNONMET he turnedNONMET around and threwNONMET a small box on to the bed .
‘ From the city , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ You seeNONMET that I had you in my mind !
’ He was out of the room before she could openNONMET the box , a dark blue leather affair , lined with white velvet , against which layNONMET a fine gold chain with a small oval locket set around the edge with seed pearls .
She gaspedNONMET in amazement .
It was without doubt the most beautiful thing she had ever ownedNONMET , or ever would .
Such delicacy , such refinement !
Her fingers tremblingMET with excitement , she fastenedNONMET it around her neck .
It should remainNONMET there for ever .
She would never takeNONMET it off .
Ellen and I lingered on in Mama Sipcott's for another hour and a half ; indulgingNONMET in the sailor's shorebound pastime of planningMET the perfect voyage .
We decidedNONMET that Masquerade would sail from the Bahamas to Panama , and thence to the Galapagos where we would findNONMET Darwin's giant tortoises .
Then we would sailNONMET south to Easter Island to exploreNONMET the mysterious statues before goingNONMET to the mutineers ' refuge on Pitcairn Island .
After that we would goNONMET to Tahiti , and I sawNONMET the excitement growMET in Ellen as she realisedNONMET that these plans were so close to comingMET  true .
It was an excitement that matchedMET my own , for I had never sailedNONMET the South Seas and I had long dreamedMET of that scatter of tiny , magically named islands strewnMET across one third of a globe .
By the time we had drunkNONMET our third bottle of wine Ellen and I had long reachedMET New Zealand and were already sailingNONMET north towards New Caledonia .
We were happy .
We caughtMET the bus back to Ellen's apartment and collectedNONMET her clothes and notebooks .
She was movingNONMET back on board Wavebreaker in preparation for the next day's early departure .
I carriedNONMET her luggage to the yard , notingMET that even Ellen's strident feminism evaporated in the face of two heavy bags and tropical heat .
Once in the boatyard Ellen ranNONMET ahead of me , evidently eager to reachNONMET Wavebreaker's air conditioning .
Then , as she reachedNONMET the dock's edge , she suddenly checkedNONMET .
‘ What on earth is that ?
Oh , no !
’ She beganNONMET to runNONMET again .
When I reachedNONMET the water's edge I understoodNONMET her dismay .
A large sports-fishing boat was mooredNONMET alongside Wavebreaker , but moored so crudely that whoever had broughtNONMET the powerboat alongside the schooner had not botheredNONMET to put out fenders , but instead had gougedNONMET long ugly gashes in Wavebreaker's white paint .
Yet even the gashes were not so ugly as the expensive boat that had causedNONMET them .
There was nothing wrong with the boat's lines , which were sleekly functional , but her long powerful hull , her upperworks , and even the interior of her capacious working deck had all been paintedNONMET with a wartime dazzle paint .
The seemingly random and jagged-edged pattern of blue , black , silver , green and white had been designedNONMET to disguiseMET a boat's shape from the prying eyes of U-Boat captains , so it seemedNONMET somewhat fanciful to thus camouflageNONMET a pleasure boat in the Bahamas .
This boat was calledMET Dream Baby , and she was clearly an expensive infant for rods and whip- and outriggers splayedMET from her upperworks like the antennae of some outlandish insect .
She boastedMET a harpoon walkway , a fly , and , above the highest wheel-platform , an aluminium canopy which heldMET a radar aerial .
The fighting chair on her aft deck had thick white leather straps givingMET it the appearance of a padded electric chair , while the dazzle paint gaveMET the boat an oddly military look that was completedNONMET by the number 666 that was paintedNONMET on her bows in silver-edged black numerals like those warships useMET to displayNONMET their commissioning numbers .
The boat's wrap-around windscreens were madeNONMET of black polarised  glass which only addedMET to Dream Baby's ugly air of menace .
Ellen , unencumbered with luggage , had already reachedNONMET Wavebreaker and takenNONMET two plastic fenders from a locker .
She swungNONMET lithely down to Dream Baby's gaudily paintedNONMET deck and cushionedNONMET the two hulls .
‘ How bad is the damage ?
’ I calledNONMET down to her when I reachedNONMET Wavebreaker .
‘ It's scrapedNONMET back to bareMET metal !
’ ‘ I'll giveMET it some paint .
’ Wavebreaker's hull was madeNONMET of steel and , while such hulls are marvellously strong and safe , they are soon weakenedMET if their steel is exposedNONMET to salt air .
I had to paintNONMET the gashes as soon as possible so that rust would not beginNONMET to biteMET into Wavebreaker's long sleekness .
Ellen lookedNONMET around the oddly painted powerboat .
‘ You'd thinkNONMET someone rich enough to ownNONMET a rig like this could affordNONMET a pair of fenders .
’ ‘ Who caresNONMET ?
Just cutNONMET the damn boat loose , ’ I saidNONMET vengefully .
Ellen ignoredNONMET my advice while I , obedient to the rule that if a job neededNONMET doing then do it without delay , foundNONMET a pot of white paint and dugMET through the locker for a clean brush .
Then , from behind me , an unfamiliar voice soundedNONMET : ‘ Oh , ringMET my bells .
’ It was a man's voice ; drawling and lazy .
I twistedNONMET around and almost blinded myself by staringNONMET straight into the sun , but then , through the dizzying glare , I made out the long silhouette of a tall man who seemedNONMET , incongruously , to be dressedNONMET in a long , transparent dressing gown .
He was emergingNONMET in stately fashion from Wavebreaker's companion and , though I could seeNONMET he was tall and lanky and had a ponytail of hair , I could make out no details of his face .
‘ Who the hell are you ?
’ I demandedNONMET .
The man ignoredNONMET me , walkingNONMET instead towards Ellen who , dressedNONMET only in shorts and T-shirt , was climbingNONMET long-legged over Wavebreaker's rail .
‘ Be still my restless heart , ’ the man had a strong , caressing voice and the slow luscious accent of America's deep south .
‘ Dear lady , dear lady , to thinkNONMET that I might have livedNONMET my whole life through and never seenNONMET you .
Oh , layNONMET me down , just layNONMET me down .
’ Ellen , usually so quick with a scornful reply , just stood and staredNONMET at the elegant stranger who stoppedNONMET one pace away from her , tookNONMET her hand , then bowed above her fingers .
He kissedNONMET the air a fastidiously polite inch above her knuckles , then closedNONMET his eyes .
‘ Dear sweet Lord above , I do thankNONMET Thee for Thy kindness in showingNONMET me this lovely woman before I diedNONMET .
’ To my astonishment and chagrin Ellen leftNONMET her hand in his as he openedNONMET his eyes and smiledNONMET at her .
‘ My name , ’ he strokedMET her with his voice , ‘ is Jesse Isambard Sweetman .
And who , dear creature , are you ?
’ Ellen still saidNONMET nothing .
I had straightened up and movedNONMET aside so that the sun no longer dazzled me and I could seeNONMET Sweetman properly , and what I sawNONMET I did not likeNONMET .
His face was old and young , sardonic and knowing , amused and handsome ; the face of a man who has seenNONMET the world's wickedness and knowsNONMET how to matchMET it with his own .
His long black hair was tiedNONMET into its ponytail with a velvet ribbon , his skin was parchment pale , and his eyes dark .
I putMET his age at forty , but even among men twenty years younger he would have been accountedNONMET handsome , and he knewNONMET it , for his expression showedMET both confidence and amusement as he continuedNONMET to holdNONMET Ellen's hand , and he showedMET even more amusement when she suddenly realisedNONMET just what liberty she was thus grantingNONMET him and jerkedNONMET her fingers swiftly away .
Thus releasedNONMET , Jesse Sweetman turnedNONMET to lookNONMET at me .
The dressing gown had proved to be a long , stylish , ankle-length duster coat which was loosely wovenNONMET from a delicate white cotton .
Beneath the filmy topcoat he woreNONMET a black shirt and black trousers that were tuckedNONMET into tall black boots .
It was a dramatic and impractical outfit of a kind I only expectedNONMET to seeNONMET on the male models who posedNONMET in the more outlandish fashion magazines that our rich clients broughtNONMET aboard Wavebreaker , yet Jesse Isambard Sweetman managedNONMET to wearNONMET the elaborate style with an elegant insouciance .
The only incongruous note was a cheap round badge , enamelledNONMET in red and yellow , that he woreNONMET on his shirt , which boreMET the legend ‘ Just SayNONMET No !
’ .
‘ You must be Nicholas Breakspear , ’ he saidNONMET carelessly , as though he did not much careNONMET whether I was or not .
‘ Is that gaudy piece of junk your boat ?
’ I gesturedNONMET to where Dream Baby's aerials showedNONMET above Wavebreaker's gunwale .
Sweetman turnedNONMET and pretendedNONMET to noticeNONMET the sports-fishing boat for the first time .
‘ No , ’ he saidNONMET helpfully , then bestowedMET a patronising smile on me .
‘ You lookNONMET so like your father .
It's really uncanny .
’ ‘ Did you bringNONMET that boat here ?
’ I perseveredNONMET .
‘ Oh , indeed I did , ’ he saidNONMET brightly , as though he merely indulgedNONMET a rather dim child's curiosity .
‘ Your mother was Malise Fielding , am I right ?
Or are you Lucy de Sills ’ son ?
’ ‘ Why the hell didn't you useNONMET fenders when you tiedNONMET alongside ?
’ He sighedNONMET , intimatingNONMET what a bore I was being .
‘ I did not useNONMET fenders , Breakspear , because I despiseNONMET precautions .
Precautions are the symptoms of small and fearful minds .
Precautions will not conquerMET empires , they will not buildMET great cities , they will not transmuteMET dreams into gold or carryMET men across wide oceans , and precautions will not , emphatically not , winMET fair ladies , ’ and here he turnedNONMET to Ellen and lasciviously dropped his gaze to her long bare legs .
Ellen twistedNONMET away and Sweetman laughedNONMET at her obvious discomfiture , then , as coolly as though he ownedNONMET Wavebreaker , he steppedNONMET down into the central cockpit where he first brushedMET at , then satNONMET on , one of the white cushioned seats by the ship's wheel .
‘ I've had a look round the boat , ’ he saidNONMET very coolly , ‘ and I approveNONMET of her .
So tellNONMET me the cost of a week's charter .
’ ‘ The man you wantNONMET to seeNONMET , ’ I saidNONMET , ‘ is calledNONMET Matthew McIllvanney and his office is the pink building with the outside staircase .
He's not here this afternoon , but you can doubtless telephoneNONMET him next week .
’ Sweetman tookNONMET a pair of polarised sunglasses from his shirt pocket and putNONMET them on before inspectingNONMET me again .
He did not seemNONMET to likeNONMET what he sawNONMET .
‘ You're really not being noticeably helpful , ’ he saidNONMET after a pause , ‘ so letNONMET us tryNONMET again shall we ?
Would you please tellNONMET me the high season price for one week ?
’ ‘ How many passengers ?
’ Ellen askedNONMET before I could refuseNONMET to answerNONMET .
Sweetman pausedNONMET again , this time to lightNONMET a long pale blue cigarette with a slim gold lighter .
He shruggedNONMET .
‘ Two , four , six passengers ?
Does it really matterNONMET ?
’ ‘ One week in high season costsNONMET ten thousand US dollars for two people , and every extra couple is another thousand bucks .
’ Ellen's voice was cold , as though she dislikedNONMET satisfyingNONMET his curiosity .
‘ And to those prices you have to addMET the boat's running costs .
’ ‘ Which are ?
’ Sweetman askedNONMET carelessly .
‘ A lot .
’ Ellen saidNONMET flatly .
‘ You're talkingNONMET fuel , food and liquor , plus any toys you might wantNONMET aboard like scuba equipment , snorkels , jet-skis or sailboards .
’ Sweetman drewMET on his fancy cigarette , then blewNONMET a plume of smoke into Wavebreaker's rigging before smilingNONMET lazily at Ellen .
‘ And tellNONMET me , sweet creature , do you countMET as a toy ?
Or are you a part of the initial ten thousand dollars ?
’ ‘ GetNONMET off the boat , ’ I saidNONMET .
‘ Shut up .
’ He turnedMET on me like a snake .
‘ You're nothing but a hired hand , Breakspear , so shutNONMET the fuck up .
’ He glancedNONMET at the paint pot and brush that I was still holdingNONMET .
‘ GoNONMET and paintNONMET something .
Be useful .
’ He staredNONMET into my eyes , challengingNONMET me to defyNONMET him , and when I did not moveNONMET he lookedNONMET back to Ellen .
‘ I askedNONMET you a question , dear heart .
Please be so good as to answerNONMET .
’ ‘ GetNONMET off this boat , ’ I toldNONMET him , but my anger only amusedNONMET Sweetman who unfoldedNONMET his long thin legs from the cushioned thwartNONMET .
‘ Dick off , ’ he saidNONMET to me .
I was surprised that he so eagerly soughtNONMET to confrontMET me .
I am not a small man , nor am I a weakling , yet the thin Sweetman seemedNONMET unconcerned as I jumpedNONMET down into the cockpit .
Then I sawNONMET why he was so confident .
He putNONMET a hand into a pocket of his elegant duster coat and broughtNONMET out a small .22 pistol that he pointedNONMET at my face .
‘ A ladies ’ gun , ’ he saidNONMET , ‘ but remarkably effective at close range .
’ ‘ Nick !
’ Ellen calledNONMET warningly , as though I might not have seenNONMET the gun .
The gun's threat had not stoppedNONMET my advance .
I was callingMET Sweetman's bluff , confident he would not dareNONMET pullNONMET the trigger , and equally confident that my marine training would letNONMET me turnMET him into mincemeat .
I was also half drunk , and thus filledMET with the Dutch courage offeredMET by  Mama Sipcott's worst white wine .
Sweetman stoodNONMET .
There was , at last , a look of alarm on his face , and I could seeNONMET him wonderingNONMET whether he really would have to pullNONMET the small trigger .
He heldNONMET the gun pointed at my eyes .
We beatMET southwards all that first day , slicingMET through a glittering sea , and propelledNONMET by an apparently changeless south-easterly trade wind .
We hardly sawNONMET the Crowninshield twins .
They briefly appearedNONMET on deck for lunch ; a meal which Rickie hardly touchedNONMET , while Robin-Anne , despite her apparent frailty , attackedMET the sandwiches and salad with the savagery of a starving bear .
Afterwards , incongruously dressedNONMET in a raincoat , she wentNONMET to the bows and staredNONMET briefly down at the mesmerising onrush of sea where it splitMET and foamedNONMET at Wavebreaker's cutwater .
She did not stayNONMET there long , but retreatedMET from the fierce sun to the stern-cabin that she would be sharingNONMET with Ellen .
The contrast between the two American girls was almost painful ; Ellen was so healthy and strong , while the waif-like Robin-Anne was pathetically wan and listless .
‘ What do you thinkNONMET of her ?
’ I askedNONMET Ellen that afternoon .
Ellen gaveMET me an amused glance .
‘ Little Orphan Annie ?
It's hard to believeNONMET she's about to be worth six million dollars .
Still , she's gotNONMET precious little else goingMET for her .
’ I smiledNONMET at the severity of Ellen's judgment .
‘ Is she that bad ?
’ ‘ She has a distressingly simple  mind , with only room for a single idea at any one time .
Presently that idea is cocaine , and nothing but cocaine .
She has an obsession with the drug that vergesMET on monomania .
She tellsNONMET me she needsNONMET to understandNONMET it if she's goingNONMET to defeatMET it .
’ ‘ Don't you approveNONMET of that ?
’ ‘ I thinkNONMET she'd do better to understandNONMET herself , ’ Ellen saidNONMET tartly .
‘ She allowedNONMET a man to persuadeNONMET her into taking the drug , so she can only blameNONMET herself for her predicament .
She'd findMET it more useful to understandNONMET her own character short­comings than to takeMET an elementary course in drug chemistry .
’ ‘ What do you makeMET of Rickie ?
’ I askedNONMET .
‘ He's precisely what anyone would expect of a drop-out Phys Ed basketball-playing retard , ’ Ellen saidNONMET scornfully , ‘ by  which I meanNONMET that he's a jock with the brains of a dung beetle .
He remindsNONMET me of your Neanderthal friend , the Maggot , except Rickie is a great deal more handsome .
’ ‘ Is he ?
’ She laughedNONMET at the suspicion of jealousy in my voice .
‘ Yes , Nicholas , he is .
But he's not cute .
’ At supper , as at lunch , Robin-Anne ateNONMET with the appetite of a horse , though her brother hardly touched his chicken and pasta salad .
‘ Don't you likeNONMET pasta ?
’ Ellen , who was perversely proud of her skills in the salad department , askedNONMET Rickie with just a touch of asperity .
‘ It's great .
Really awesome .
’ Rickie litNONMET a cigarette .
‘ I just guessNONMET I'm not hungry .
’ Robin-Anne reachedNONMET over and tippedNONMET her brother's food on to her own plate .
‘ Kind of starving , ’ she justifiedNONMET her theft , then pouredNONMET herself some diet soda .
For once we were carryingNONMET neither wine nor spirits on Wavebreaker , for Jackson Chatterton's drug clinic had utterly forbiddenMET us to offerNONMET the twins any alcohol , sayingNONMET that any mood-altering drug could hamperMET the success of a detoxification programme .
We were thus officially a dry boat , though I had hiddenNONMET some Irish whiskey in the engine room , and I was sure that Ellen would have similarly salted away some vodka .
It seemedNONMET that Ellen and I were not the only ones to takeMET such a precaution , for late that night Jackson Chatterton lumberedNONMET on deck with a bottle in one huge hand .
‘ Bourbon , ’ he explainedNONMET laconically .
‘ WantNONMET some ?
’ ‘ I thoughtNONMET you'd never askNONMET .
’ He chuckledNONMET , producedMET two cardboard cups , and pouredNONMET me a generous slug of the whiskey .
We were alone on deck , though not the only ones awakeNONMET for I could hearNONMET Rickie and Ellen's voices comingMET from the open skylight of the main saloon .
I hopedNONMET Thessy was fast    asleep for he would be takingMET the morning watch .
‘ Cheers , ’ I saidNONMET .
Chatterton raisedNONMET his cardboard cup in silent acknowledgement , then staredNONMET ahead to where a great beam swept around the sky .
‘ A lighthouse ?
’ he askedNONMET in a voice which suggestedMET that a prudent man avoided such things .
I noddedNONMET .
‘ It's calledNONMET the Hole in the Wall .
Once we're past it we can turnNONMET out to the open ocean .
Things will be a bit livelier then .
’ ‘ Livelier ?
’ ‘ We'll have a bit more sea , kick up some spray .
’ I had spokenNONMET enthusiastically , but Jackson Chatterton seemedNONMET unmoved by  the prospect .
‘ What are your plans ?
’ he askedNONMET me .
I had nothing particular planned , merely an idea that it might be interesting to thrashMET our way out into the open ocean , though , mindful of the danger of tropical storms , I had no intention of goingNONMET too far from the safe shelter of a Bahamian hurricane hole .
But I fanciedNONMET feelingNONMET the long hard pressure of ocean waves against our hull and , though we were short-handed , I reckonedMET that a few days out sight of land would shakeMET us all down quickly .
I explainedNONMET all that to Chatterton , but stressedMET that we would runMET for cover at the first sign of trouble .
He must have assumedMET that I meantNONMET trouble from the twins , for he suddenly becameNONMET surprisingly loquacious .
‘ They won't giveMET you any grief in the next few days , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ Now that they can't getMET hold of cocaine they'll just crash out .
’ I grimacedNONMET .
‘ Does that meanMET they'll be seeing  green monkeys and blue snakes up the rigging ?
’ Chatterton pouredNONMET himself more bourbon , then putNONMET the bottle within my reach on the binnacle shelf .
‘ ComingMET off cocaine isn't like that .
At first they'll just wantNONMET to do nothing but eatNONMET and sleepNONMET .
It's the opposite of a cocaine high , you seeMET .
’ He pausedNONMET .
‘ The difficult bit startsNONMET two or three days later .
That's when the real hell beginsNONMET .
’ ‘ For all of us ?
’ ‘ It won't be easy , ‘ he saidNONMET grimly , and I was suddenly rather glad to have the taciturn Chatterton aboard .
The big man had obviously comeNONMET on deck to warnNONMET me what to expect from the twins , and for that I was grateful .
‘ I noticedNONMET that Rickie wasn't eatingNONMET today , ’ I saidNONMET , ‘ but Robin-Anne was ?
’ Chatterton noddedNONMET .
‘ Rickie may have stoppedNONMET his cocaine a day or two ago , which meansMET he's probably already over the crash period .
I promiseNONMET you one thing ; he's broughtNONMET none of it on board .
I searchedNONMET him and his luggage , and he was clean .
’ The big man thoughtNONMET for a few seconds , then laughedNONMET .
‘ He'd better be clean !
That turkey has gotMET one chance of avoidingNONMET jail , just one , and that chance is by provingNONMET to the judge that he's cleanedMET up his act .
And if he doesn't do that , then the man will sendNONMET Rickie's plump young ass down to the gang-rape squad in the county jail .
’ Chatterton did not soundNONMET unduly worried at that prospect .
‘ Can we be sure Robin-Anne didn't bringNONMET any of the drug aboard ?
’ I askedNONMET .
‘ She won't have done that , ’ Chatterton saidNONMET with conviction .
‘ That girl is serious about giving it up                     , real serious , heavy serious !
That girl is really tryingNONMET !
She studiesNONMET the drug , you knowNONMET ?
Like it was her enemy .
’ Chatterton had spokenNONMET with genuine admiration .
I glancedNONMET up at the sails , down at the compass , then ahead to where the lighthouse loom arced powerfully through the night .
‘ So what are the twins , chances ?
’ ‘ DependsNONMET on their will  power , 'cause nothing else will do it for them .
There ain't no pill to getMET you off the powder , Mr Breakspear , only will power .
And letNONMET me tellNONMET you , comingMET off coke is the hardest damn thing in the world , and you're real lucky if you have a rich daddy who paysNONMET for people to holdMET your hand while you goMET through the hell of it .
The twins ’ daddy has paidNONMET for you and me , Mr Breakspear , and for everyone else on board this boat , but even with all that money and all  this boat , we still might not succeedNONMET with them .
’ ‘ It's that hard ?
’ ‘ It is that hard , ’ he saidNONMET ominously , and I thoughtNONMET of John Maggovertski's sadness for a pretty girl who had whoredNONMET herself to payNONMET for the white powder .
‘ And it's even harder , ’ Jackson Chatterton's voice was suddenly sinister , ‘ for a poor person who has no one to helpNONMET them .
’ I staredNONMET at Jackson Chatterton , and at last sensed the drama that layMET behind his big calm presence .
‘ Why did you leaveNONMET the army , Mr Chatterton ?
’ I askedNONMET after a long pause .
‘ I guessNONMET you can guessNONMET , ’ he saidNONMET .
I guessedNONMET , but did not makeMET him confirm my guess .
Instead I askedNONMET whether the American army had helpedMET him to kickMET his drug habit .
‘ Sure they triedNONMET , they triedNONMET real hard , but back then I didn't wantNONMET to be helpedNONMET .
’ ‘ But you still gotMET off cocaine ?
On your own ?
’ ‘ Eventually .
’ The light inside the binnacle glossedMET his black face with a sheen of red , sparkingMET his eyes like fire .
He was not lookingNONMET at me , but staringNONMET doggedly ahead into the turning white light of the Hole in the Wall .
‘ And I had to loseMET a good , good woman before I cameMET to my senses .
But I did kickMET the drug , Mr Breakspear , and it was probably the hardest damned thing I ever did in all my life .
But once I'd done it , I sworeNONMET I'd helpNONMET others do it .
’ ‘ Even the very rich ?
’ I askedNONMET provocatively .
‘ The rich trash pay the bills , Mr Breakspear , which letsMET me giveMET my spare time away to the poor trash .
’ I lookedNONMET at the tough , impressive face .
‘ Are the twins trashMET ?
’ He pausedNONMET before replyingNONMET , then gaveMET the smallest shake of his head .
‘ She's OK , but him ?
’ This time the pause was almost eloquent , then he gaveMET a richly contagious laugh .
‘ I'd have likedNONMET to have had Rickie Crowninshield in my platoon for just five minutes .
’ I laughedNONMET too .
‘ Good to have you aboard .
’ ‘ It ain't bad being aboard , ’ he saidNONMET , and heldNONMET out his hand and , not before time , we shookNONMET .
By midnight I was alone on deck , and happy to be alone .
I likeNONMET sailingNONMET alone at night .
I likeNONMET to watchNONMET the phosphorescence curling away from the hull and I likeNONMET to watchNONMET the brilliant specks of light fade in the black deep water far in the ship's wake .
I likeNONMET to be alone under the careless profusion of the stars , and alone on a moon-glossed sea .
I likeNONMET the sounds of a boat sailing at night .
The sounds are the same as those of daylight , yet somehow the night magnifiesMET and sharpensMET the creak of a yielding block , the sigh of air over a shroud , the stretching of a sail , the hiss of water sliding sleek against the hull , the curl of a quarter-wave fallingNONMET away , and the thump as a wave strikesNONMET the cutwater to be shearedMET into two bright slices of whiteness .
I likeNONMET the purposefulness of a boat at night as it slitsMET a path across an empty planet .
I likeNONMET the secretiveness of a boat in the blackness , when the only thing to dislikeNONMET is the prospect of dawn , which seemsNONMET like a betrayal because , at night , in a boat under sail , it is easy to feelMET very close to God — for eternity is all around .
I tackedNONMET the ship shortly after midnight , doing the job by myself and enjoyingNONMET the work .
Ellen was still awake , talkingNONMET in the stateroom with Rickie , but everyone else seemedNONMET asleep .
I wishedNONMET that Ellen and Rickie would goNONMET to their beds , for the soft mutter of their voices was an intrusion on the dark and star- studded infinity  through which I steered Wavebreaker .
The picture , very like the one Rufus Fletcher had takenMET in the summer of 1976 , occupied the screen for about fifteen seconds .
The whole item was allowedMET no more than four times that in the BBC's Sunday evening news broadcastNONMET at 6.30 .
The other forty-five seconds were taken up by a policeman talkingNONMET to a reporter about having nothing to sayNONMET except that there would be an inquest .
But Shiva and Lili Manjusri sawNONMET the picture and so did Rufus Fletcher .
Adam Verne-Smith , unwindingMET in Puerto de la Cruz , did not of course seeNONMET it .
He did not even seeNONMET an English newspaper .
They were expensive to buyNONMET and cameMET a day late .
He did not wantNONMET to be remindedNONMET of home and the only paper he even glanced at was the International Herald Tribune , a copy of which Anne foundNONMET on the beach .
His father , at home in Edgware , saidNONMET to his wife : ‘ Good God , Wyvis Hall , as I liveNONMET and breatheNONMET .
’ Beryl Verne-Smith peeredNONMET , but the picture immediately vanishedNONMET .
‘ Yes , I supposeNONMET it was .
’ The policeman talked , the reporter tryingNONMET to jogMET him into revelations and failing .
In the background , autumnal trees could be seenNONMET and a church on the summit of a low hill .
Lewis Verne-Smith satNONMET shakingNONMET his head , less as a gesture of denial than of a generalized despair at the state of the world .
It was not that unpleasant memories were evokedNONMET , for these were always with him , his existence was inseparable from that old bitterness , but that a sight of the house , even the glimpse of a photograph , revivedMET the precise feelings he had had — why , it must be getting on for eleven years ago .
‘ Ten and a half , ’ saidNONMET his wife .
‘ I shall have to getNONMET in touch with the police .
No two ways about it , I shall have to getNONMET in touch with them .
’ ‘ Not this evening , surely ?
’ saidNONMET Beryl , who wantedNONMET to watchNONMET Mastermind .
Lewis saidNONMET nothing .
The room in which they were sittingNONMET underwentMET the curious shrinking process to which it was subject whenever he was remindedNONMET of Wyvis Hall or his Uncle Hilbert or even if the county of Suffolk were mentionedNONMET .
Suddenly it grewNONMET small and poky .
The brick side-wall of his neighbour's house seemed to have moved itself  four  or five  feet further towards  the dividing fence , so that it loomedNONMET offensively .
Lewis gotNONMET up and pulledNONMET the curtains across with a pettish jerk of his hands .
‘ Shouldn't you waitNONMET until Adam gets back ?
’ Beryl saidNONMET .
‘ Why ?
What would that be in aid of ?
’ Beryl meantNONMET that Adam had been among the previous owners of Wyvis Hall while her husband had not , but she knewNONMET better than to pointMET this out .
‘ There is no one living knowsNONMET that lovely place better than 1 .
’ ‘ That's true .
’ ‘ I shan't waitNONMET till Adam returns , ’ Lewis saidNONMET in that manner that had once ledMET his daughter to callNONMET him the Frog Footman , ‘ but I shall waitNONMET until tomorrow .
’ Men and women do not usually putMET their baser feelings and intentions into words , not even in the deep recesses of their own minds .
So Lewis did not sayNONMET , even to himself , when he was privately considering tryingNONMET to getMET hold of his son in Tenerife , that he dislikedNONMET Adam and would have been pleased to spoilNONMET his holiday .
Instead , he rationalizedNONMET his thoughts and justified himself Adam probably — indeed , almost certainly — knewNONMET nothing about the find in the pine wood , but Adam had once ownedNONMET the house and had thus taken on a responsibility .
He could not shedMET that responsibility just because he had soldNONMET the place .
Lewis would have agreedNONMET with Oscar Wilde that our past is what we are .
We can not ridNONMET ourselves of it .
Therefore it was Adam's duty to comeNONMET home and faceMET the music , even though this might be no more than a short blast on a tin whistle .
But he had no precise idea where Adam was and he did not thinkNONMET Adam's travel agent ( a personal friend of the young Verne-Smiths ) would tellNONMET him .
Some excuse would be madeMET for not tellingNONMET him .
Lewis's bark , anyway , was always worse than his bite .
He had virtually no bite , as he had once overheardNONMET Adam sayNONMET to Bridget , and heardNONMET it with helpless chagrin .
‘ A bloody good thing or our childhood would have been a misery instead of just a bore .
’ Lewis walkedNONMET into his local police station in Edgware on Monday morning .
They seemedNONMET surprised to seeNONMET him but not astonished .
The Suffolk police had begunNONMET huntingMET up previous owners of Wyvis Hall and they had been alertedNONMET that a Verne-Smith livedNONMET in their area .
There were , after all , only two in the London phone directory .
This might be a bonus .
He was askedNONMET to waitNONMET and then shownNONMET into a room where a detective sergeant preparedMET to takeMET a statement from him .
With busy pomposity Lewis dictatedNONMET it to a typist and would have goneMET on and on had he not been diplomatically restrained .
‘ Wyvis Hall , Nunes , Suffolk , and the twenty acres of land surroundingNONMET it were the property , through his marriage , of my uncle , Hilbert Verne-Smith .
They cameMET into the possession of my son Hilbert John Adam Verne-Smith under my uncle's will , bypassingMET myself , though my son was no more than nineteen at the time of my uncle's death .
Being an undergraduate at the time , my son naturally never consideredMET actually residingNONMET in the house .
He was in agreement with my suggestion that the property be soldNONMET and before he returnedNONMET to college in the autumn of 1976 , he tookMET my advice and placedMET house and lands in the hands of an estate agent .
‘ Country properties were not sellingNONMET well at the time .
£45,000 was the asking price and I was not surprised that the sale , so to speakNONMET , hung fire .
However , in the spring of 1977 an offer was madeMET , which my son accepted .
This sale later fell through and it was not until the following August that Wyvis Hall was finally soldNONMET to a Mr and Mrs Langan for the much improved figure of £51,995 .
‘ As far as I knowNONMET , my son's personal acquaintance with Wyvis Hall was confinedMET to my uncle's lifetime when 1 , my wife and son and daughter frequently stayedNONMET with him .
After my uncle's death in April 1976 he visitedNONMET Wyvis Hall on perhaps two , or at the most three , separate occasions simply for the purpose of looking it over and reachingMET a decision about the disposal of furniture and effects .
‘ I supposeNONMET it is possible that squatters or other vagrants tookMET possession of the house between the time of my uncle's death and the sale of the property .
Certainly my son never letNONMET it or allowed anyone to occupyNONMET it on either a temporary or permanent basis .
‘ My son is at present on holiday in Tenerife with his wife and daughter .
I can not sayNONMET precisely when I expectNONMET him to returnNONMET , though I should supposeNONMET in about a week from now .
’ It was all very small and quiet and low-key .
The snippet in Rufus's Monday morning newspaper measured just an inch in depth .
It answeredMET the question he had askedNONMET himself and toldMET him that the bones of a very young child had been foundNONMET as well as those of a young woman. This was not a shock .
How could it be otherwise , since this was Wyvis Hall and the pine wood and the animal cemetery ?
To photographNONMET the house for the news last night the cameraman must have stoodNONMET just where he had stoodNONMET himself , on the edge of the lawn with his back to the cedar tree .
A popular .
mass-produced camera he had usedNONMET , but quite a good one .
One thing about Zosie's pilfering , she never stoleNONMET rubbish .
He had takenMET a picture of her after that and one of the animal cemetery .
‘ Why is the grass always so short up here ?
’ Adam had askedNONMET .
‘ Rabbits , I expectNONMET .
’ ‘ Why can't bloody rabbits comeNONMET and eatNONMET my lawns ?
’ Adam always referredNONMET to ‘ my lawns ’ , ‘ my house ’ , ‘ my furniture ’ .
It had gotMET up Rufus's nose a bit , though Adam had a perfect right to do this .
It was his , all of it , and it wentMET to his head rather .
Nineteen-year-olds seldom inheritNONMET country mansions , after all .
It must have been some time in August when I tookMET those pictures , Rufus thoughtNONMET , and a couple of weeks later it was all over .
Coincidentally , as the community and their lives together brokeMET up , so did the weather .
It was rainingNONMET intermittently all the time they were in the cemetery , the pines bowingMET and shiveringMET in the wind .
Sometimes they had had to stopNONMET and takeMET shelter under the closely planted-trees .
If the weather had heldMET and still been hot and dry would they have dugNONMET deeper ?
Probably not .
In spite of the rain , the earth was still as hard as iron .
A sheet of rain had come down then , a hard , gusty shower , while they were layingNONMET the squares of turf back in place , and Adam had saidNONMET something about the rain makingMET the grass growNONMET quickly , the rain being on their side .
‘ We should all goNONMET our separate ways as soon as we can , ’ Rufus had saidNONMET .
‘ We should pack up now and goNONMET .
’ The spade and the fork they had hung up among the other tools in the stables .
They had packedNONMET and Adam had locked up the house .
At some point Rufus himself had takenNONMET the things out of the fridge and leftNONMET the door open to defrostNONMET it .
Adam closedNONMET the front door and stoodNONMET there for a moment as if he could not wrenchMET himself away .
So much of its beauty had been strippedMET from it by the whipping winds .
And by  the neglect of the long hot summer .
A sudden gust of rain dashed against the red bricks that were already stainedNONMET in patches by water .
The house that when he first sawNONMET it had seemed to float on a raft of golden mist , now layMET in a wilderness , amidst ragged grass and straggling bushes and trees dead from the heat .
Dirty grey clouds tumbledMET across the sky above the slate roof , now the only thing that shoneMET , glazed with rain .
But Rufus admittedMET to himself that the beauties of nature and architecture had never meantMET much to him .
It was the heat and sunshine and privacy he likedNONMET .
And now he longedNONMET only to getNONMET away .
They all gotNONMET into Goblander and he droveNONMET away up the drift , Adam next to him , the others in the back .
The drift had becomeNONMET a tunnel of overgrowth that dripped water on to the roof of the van .
None of them allowedMET their eyes to turnMET towards the pine wood .
At the top they cameNONMET out into uncompromising , bright grey light , the bleak , hedgeless lane , the flat meadows where here and there stunted trees squattedMET like old men in cloaks .
Adam's simile , not his , thoughtNONMET Rufus with a grimace .
No one askedNONMET where he was takingNONMET them .
No one spokeNONMET .
Adam had Hilbert's old golf-bag stuck between his legs and Rufus guessedNONMET the gun was inside it .
They must have goneNONMET a good two miles before they metMET another car .
Rufus overtookNONMET a bus goingMET to Colchester and droppedMET the two in the back so that they could catchMET it .
He tookNONMET Adam on to Sudbury for him to catchMET a train there and at that point they partedNONMET .
Adam gotNONMET down from Goblander and saidNONMET , ‘ For ever and for ever , farewell , Rufus .
’ Which was probably a quotation from something , though Rufus did not knowNONMET what and thoughtNONMET fastidiously that it was in bad taste , histrionic , though just like Adam .
‘ TakeMET care , ’ saidNONMET Rufus , and not lookingNONMET back any more than he had done when they returnedNONMET from the cemetery , drove off round the town he had gotNONMET to knowNONMET so well , over the Stour bridge , into Essex , headingNONMET for Halstead and Dunmow and Ongar and London .
He never had seenNONMET any of them again .
There had been no need to pretendNONMET , to turnNONMET aside .
Briefly , startingNONMET his fifth year in medical school something over thirteen months later , he had wonderedNONMET if Shiva Manjusri would be one of the incoming freshmen .
But no , his intuition had been accurate .
At any rate Shiva's face was not among the several brown faces .
As for the others , avoidingNONMET them had presentedMET no problems .
Would they getNONMET in touch with him now ?
No contingency plans had been madeMET for this eventuality .
So long as there was no hunt for a missing girl they had feltMET themselves reasonably safe .
Their minds had not reachedMET out to the terror of what had in fact happenedNONMET .
None of them had been the kind of people who could have imagined devotion to a pet animal or according to it funerary rites .
It was Shiva who had proposedNONMET the site .
They had congratulatedNONMET him on his ingenuity .
Ten years … An ovarian cyst , nothing to getNONMET upset about , Rufus toldNONMET Ms Beauchamp .
She was thirty-two , an editor with a distinguished publishing house , married to an investigative journalist .
As yet they had no children , but she wantedNONMET four , she toldNONMET Rufus .
‘ No reason why you shouldn't .
’ He had another glance at her notes .
‘ In fact , a peculiarity about this condition is that it seldom if ever occursNONMET in a woman who's had a baby .
’ ‘ My God , ’ she saidNONMET , putting her coat on , .
'and there was 1 , makingMET my husband's life a misery , sure I'd gotMET the dreaded C. ’ They all thoughtNONMET they'd gotMET the dreaded C , poor things .
You couldn't blameNONMET them .
Rufus tookNONMET her £40 off her by the reception desk , having setMET in train the arrangements by which she would be admittedMET to a fashionable West End clinic , with Rufus , her surgery and her hospitalization ultimately paidNONMET for by some provident association to which she and her husband subscribed .
Rufus shookNONMET hands .
He walkedNONMET back to his consulting room , dyingMET for a cigarette .
This was unlike him .
He could usually getMET through quite easily until after lunch .
He thoughtNONMET , I knowNONMET what my idea of heaven would be , if by  heaven we meanNONMET a place of bliss in which to passMET eternity : a sanctuary where one might chain-smoke without impairment of breathing , destruction of the lungs or damage to the heart , light each fresh cigarette from the glowing butt of its predecessor , and drink ice-free but hundred-proof chilled vodka laced with two drops of angostura and a gill of newly opened Perrier endlessly , with increasing euphoria until a peak of joy and ease was reachedMET but without any sub-sequent nausea or pain or dehydration or oblivion … SittingNONMET alone , he litNONMET his cigarette , the first of the day , and there cameMET that faint swimming in the head , a tautening of the gut .
He closedNONMET his eyes .
If it comesMET to light that I was in that house with Adam and the others , he thoughtNONMET with cold clarity , if someone tellsMET the papers , or the police and thence the papers , that I was there during the summer of 1976 , livingNONMET there , it will be all up with me .
I will loseMET my practice and my reputation and everything that I have and can lookMET forward to , if not my liberty .
And without the rest I shan't careNONMET about my liberty .
It would be bad enough if I were a G P or an expert in some other branch of medicine , an orthopaedic surgeon , for instance , or an ear , nose and throat man , but I am a gynaecologist , and it is the bones of a young woman and a baby that have been foundNONMET there … What worried woman would comeNONMET to me ?
What Mrs Strawson or Ms Beauchamp ?
What GP would sendNONMET her to me ?
If I were innocent , thoughtNONMET Rufus , I knowNONMET very well what I would do .
I would pick up the phone and phone my solicitor and askNONMET to comeNONMET and seeNONMET him and getMET his advice .
He might adviseNONMET me to makeMET a statement to the police which I should of course do under his guidance .
But I shall not do this because I am not innocent .
I shall sitNONMET here and waitNONMET and sweatMET it out and lookMET the facts in the face , tryingNONMET to anticipateNONMET the worst that can happenNONMET .
The wonderful thing about the human mind , Adam thoughtNONMET , is the way it copesMET when the worst happensNONMET .
Beyond that worst happening you thinkNONMET there can be nothing , the unimaginable has takenMET place , and on the other side is death , destruction , the end .
But the worst happensNONMET and you reelMET from it , you stagger , the shock is enormous , and then you beginNONMET to recoverMET .
You rallyMET , you standMET up and faceMET it .
You getNONMET  used to it .
An hour maybe and you are makingMET contingency plans .
For what had happenedNONMET was not the worst , you realizedNONMET that .
The worst was yet to comeMET , was perhaps always yet to comeMET , never would actually comeMET , because if it did  you would knowNONMET it , that would be reality , and there would be nothing then but to killNONMET yourself .
Quickly .
Now that he was able to , he assembledMET what had happenedNONMET and laidMET the facts before himself .
They had dug up those bones at Wyvis Hall and had decidedNONMET it was murder they were investigatingNONMET .
Bones , skeletons , bodies , do not buryNONMET themselves .
Those were the facts , as far as he knewNONMET them up to this moment .
He would knowNONMET more , much more , in the days to comeMET .
What was certain was that he could no longer useNONMET the escape key .
It was defunct .
The passages it cancelledNONMET had , in any case , as in certain programmes , not been lostMET but stored on some limbo disc from whence they must now be retrievedMET .
Adam satNONMET in his parents ' house , drinkingNONMET tea .
There must be a total retrieval now , the one good thing about which was that it might banishMET his dreams .
He was aware of a slight feeling of sickness and of cold , an absence of hunger , though he had been feelingMET quite hungry when he gotNONMET off the plane .
Anne satNONMET next to him on his mother's cretonne-covered settee and Abigail layNONMET on a plaid rug on the floor , kickingNONMET with her legs and punchingNONMET with her arms .
His mother keptNONMET pokingNONMET toys which she did not wantNONMET at her .
A passage from a novel by John O'Hara cameMET back to Adam .
He had memorizedNONMET it years ago in the Ecalpemos epoch : ‘ The safest way to liveNONMET is first , inheritNONMET money , second , be bornNONMET without taste for liquor , third , have a legitimate job that keepsNONMET you busy , fourth , marryNONMET a wife who will cooperateNONMET in your sexual peculiarities , fifth , joinMET some big church , sixth , don't liveNONMET too long .
’ Apart from the last one which he hadn't gotMET to yet and the penultimate one which seemedNONMET to apply in America more than here ( here he had joinedMET the golf club ) he had compliedNONMET with all the rest .
Or his nature and luck had compliedMET for him .
Nemesis had still comeMET down like the wolf on the fold .
He had not wantedNONMET to come back here .
But there had been no spirit in him , the shock of what his father toldNONMET him had been too great .
‘ Something that will interestNONMET you , Adam , something to makeMET you sitMET up .
They've dug up a lot of human bones at my old uncle's house … ‘ By the time he had ralliedMET and gotMET himself together and was thinking of things to sayNONMET to the police it was too late and they were heading north .
Anne was furious .
When Lewis saidNONMET to come back with him and eatNONMET there Adam had gotMET a kick on the ankle from Anne and another kick when he hadn't repliedNONMET .
He had turnedMET on her and saidNONMET with cold savagery , ‘ For fuck's sake , stop kickingNONMET me , will you ?
’ He expectedNONMET his father to riseMET and sayNONMET something about that being no way to speakNONMET to one's wife or not in front of the child , he was capable of that .
But he had saidNONMET nothing , only looked subdued , and Adam realizedNONMET why .
His own terrible fear and anger had communicatedMET itself to his father and shownMET him what the better part of valour was : keepingNONMET silent .
Having putMET the cat among the pigeons , madeMET mischief in his special way , he was lyingMET low now and waiting .
The old bastard .
Adam only wishedNONMET Uncle Hilbert had leftMET him Wyvis Hall and then there would have been no Ecalpemos , no Zosie , and no deaths .
And Adam couldn't seeMET he would have been much worse off .
He and Anne would be living in a house like this one , rather than that neo-Georgian palace .
Children , after all , he thoughtNONMET , lookingNONMET at Abigail , were happy wherever they were , so long as they were lovedNONMET … His parents had not askedNONMET him what sort of holiday he had had or how the flight had been .
The conversation was exclusively on the subject of the discovery at Wyvis Hall .
Adam did not knowNONMET whether to be glad or sorry he had not obtainedNONMET an English newspaper while away .
If he had done the shock would have been less but on the other hand , his holiday would have been spoiltMET .
He would have likedNONMET very much to be alone .
Of course he knewNONMET there was no possibility of this , now or when he returnedNONMET home , for when you were married you never could be alone .
Presumably that was the point .
What was he goingNONMET to tellNONMET Anne ?
How much was he goingNONMET to tellNONMET her ?
He didn't knowNONMET .
None of it , if he could helpMET it .
They satNONMET at the table in the dining area to eatNONMET an absurdly early high tea .
Lewis askedNONMET him if he could rememberNONMET the day when he heardNONMET he had inheritedNONMET Wyvis Hall and had walkedNONMET in here and astoundedNONMET them with his news .
‘ He had a beard then , Anne .
’ Lewis's subdued air had changedMET to one of high good humour .
‘ You wouldn't have recognizedNONMET him , he lookedNONMET like John the Baptist .
’ Adam could rememberNONMET very well but he wasn't goingMET to sayNONMET so .
‘ What a funny thing , ’ saidNONMET Lewis .
‘ We had ham salad that day too .
What a coincidence !
Oh , yes , I've been meaning to askNONMET you , who was it lookedMET after Wyvis Hall while you were in Greece ?
’ Adam could eatNONMET nothing .
The other time , he rememberedNONMET , it was his father who hadn't been able to eatNONMET .
He didn't knowNONMET what Lewis meantNONMET about someone lookingMET after the house but no doubt he , Adam , had at the time concocted some tale to keepMET his father quiet , to keepMET him away even .
‘ Someone from the village , you saidNONMET , ’ Lewis persistedNONMET .
‘ How can I rememberNONMET that far back ?
’ ‘ The police will wantNONMET to knowNONMET .
It may be of vital importance .
’ ‘ Aren't you goingMET to eatNONMET your meat , dear ?
’ saidNONMET Beryl .
Abigail , who had been putNONMET upstairs in one of the bedrooms to sleepNONMET , setMET up a wailing sound .
Adam was on his feet at once .
‘ I thinkNONMET we should goNONMET .
’ They had to waitNONMET until his father was ready .
Adam would have preferredNONMET to phoneNONMET for a hire car but Lewis wouldn't hearNONMET of it .
Anne satNONMET in the front in the passenger seat while Adam was in the back with Abigail .
If his father could have found out what flight they were comingNONMET on , the police certainly could .
It was possible they might be waitingNONMET for him .
They would wishNONMET to interviewNONMET every former owner or occupant of Wyvis Hall .
He lookedNONMET again at the newspaper account of the adjourned inquest that his father had savedMET for him .
It would be owners and occupants of Wyvis Hall between nine and twelve years before that they would wishNONMET to interviewNONMET , and those were Great-Uncle Hilbert , who was dead , himself and Ivan Langan to whom he had soldNONMET the house .
As for other occupants , how would they knowNONMET who else had livedNONMET there ?
It was ironical that ten days before he had seenNONMET Shiva at Heathrow .
The encounter he now sawMET as an omen , a shadow castMET by a coming  event .
What would that event be ?
Adam did not wantNONMET at this point to speculateNONMET , it madeMET hi– feelMET sick .
He turned the newspaper over so that he could not seeNONMET that headline and those paragraphs .
In high spirits , his father was talkingNONMET about the immense advances made in forensic science in recent years .
As soon as they gotNONMET home , Anne startedNONMET gettingNONMET Abigail to bed .
Their cases humpedNONMET upstairs and put into the bedroom , Adam looked Rufus Fletcher up in the phone book .
He was in there twice , at a Wimpole Street number and again at an address in Mill Hill : Rufus H. Fletcher , MB , MRCP .
All these years then , or for some of them , Rufus had been livingNONMET three or four miles from him .
He couldn't look Shiva up because he couldn't rememberNONMET his surname .
Women marryNONMET and changeMET their names , he thoughtNONMET , there was no point in pursuingMET that one .
Of course he could look up Robin Tatian but where , really , would that getMET him ?
He was reaching-for the blue directory when Anne cameNONMET back with Abigail in her arms , so Adam tookNONMET her and carriedNONMET her back to bed himself and tucked her in and kissedNONMET her .
She was almost asleep .
He wonderedNONMET if Rufus had children and if so did he worryMET about them comingMET to terrible harm the way Adam worried ?
Was his whole life affectedNONMET by what had happenedNONMET at Ecalpemos ?
Adam might have escapedMET the file memories for years , suppressedMET them and jerkedMET violently away from them , but he had never been able to pretendNONMET he was unscathed by those events .
Sometimes he feltMET that he was the person he was because of them and actedNONMET the way he did because of their effects .
He satNONMET by Abigail's cot , not wanting to rememberNONMET , but knowingNONMET that now he must .
There was nothing in his house to remindNONMET him of Ecalpemos .
Everything that was left , everything he and Rufus hadn't soldNONMET , had goneMET to Ivan Langan with the house .
For a song , too , because he had not been able to bearMET the thought of goingNONMET back , meetingNONMET a valuer , walkingNONMET about the house , pickingNONMET things off shelves and out of cupboards .
Only once had he returnedNONMET after they all leftNONMET and that had been bad enough , like a dream — no , like stepping into the set and scenario of some frightening film , a Hitchcock movie perhaps .
He askedNONMET the taxi he had takenMET to putMET him down at the top of the drift and he had walkedNONMET to the house .
It was almost a year since he had been there and in that time nothing had been done , nothing had been touchedNONMET .
From the pine wood he simply averted his eyes — till later .
The drift was thickly overgrownNONMET , a dank tunnel out of whose bushy sides the tendrils of brambles and briar roses caughtMET at his clothes .
One of these whippedMET back at him and as he caughtNONMET at it a thorn droveMET into the fleshy pad of his finger .
That thorn had been there , festeringNONMET , for months .
A dull cool summer it had been , as different as could be from the year before .
No golden light bathedMET the red brick of the house .
It no longer lookedNONMET mellow .
Beautiful , yes , but severe somehow and , to Adam's heightened awareness , reproachful .
He foundMET himself encouraging , fostering , the scenario illusion .
Only thus , only by pretendingNONMET unreality , pretendingNONMET this was a part he actedNONMET , could he go on , crossNONMET the wild , shaggy grass , goNONMET past the black-branched cedar tree , arriveNONMET at the porch set in its four Doric columns and insertNONMET his key in the lock .
Conclusion Task analysis has not and can not be reducedMET to a set of standardised procedures which the aspiring analyst could acquireMET in a formal training course .
The techniques just describedNONMET are no more than guidelines in what remains the creative art of studyingNONMET and describingNONMET what an experienced worker is doing or will be requiredNONMET to do .
The danger in being too rigid is that justice will not be done to the flexibility and complexity of human performance .
The danger of being too flexible is that the ergonomists will have an inadequate basis from which to designMET interfaces , training courses and other operator aids .
If a comprehensive task description can be completedNONMET then it is legitimate to enquireNONMET why the task can not be allocatedNONMET to a technical device rather than a human being .
Yet without a reasonably comprehensive task description the total system performance may be unreliable or unpredictable .
There is a necessary compromise which can only be arrivedMET at in the context of a particular system .
As mentionedMET earlier there are always the twin problems of how to getMET the information and how to presentMET it .
It is sometimes easier to proceedMET on the basis of : ‘ If I were doing the job this is how I would do it ’ , but this can be delusory even for analysts who have past experience as operators .
For analysts who are designers creatingMET a new task there may be no alternative , but any task description arrivedMET at by this method should be checkedNONMET against the behaviour of real operators as they gainMET experience .
A particular difficulty about task synthesis is that there is no easy way of confirmingNONMET completeness .
A task description which is part of a design process should be fully — documented in terms of the origins of information , the assumptions made and the methods used .
The standard method of producing task descriptions is to writeNONMET all the separate sub-tasks at various levels on cards and then assembleMET the cards in a network .
There is a temptation to makeNONMET these final diagrams very large , but often it is more useful to separateMET into small units with cross-referencing .
The optimum size seemsNONMET to be A3 , this is easily copiedNONMET and circulated but is large enough to containMET considerable detail .
The procedure can be computerised , there are programmes available for the easy production , manipulation and storage of block diagrams with useful cross-referencing facilities .
There is an inherent difficulty in that often the main dividend from a task analysis is from the act of obtainingNONMET it .
Those not involvedNONMET findMET it difficult to gainMET very much from a presentation of a task description .
Like reference books , they have to be usedNONMET rather than readNONMET .
Task analysis can be very expensive in skilled manpower , but in lookingMET at cost/value it is important to includeMET in value the increase in mutual understanding which occursNONMET when a multi-disciplinary team conductsMET the analysis .
If such a team is usedNONMET the required man-hours can be optimisedNONMET by usingNONMET the Delphi method rather than a long series of group meetings .
Political , economic and social issues which ariseMET in conductingMET Task Analyses are discussedMET in the context of Job Analysis ( p. 148 ) .
Application Man-power planning The ‘ Human Resource ’ concept of man-power as the central profit­ generating asset of any organisation has madeMET some progress over the past twenty years .
There was particular interest around 1970 when companies were prosperous , stable and innovative ( IPM , 1972 , Patten , 1971 ) .
The objective is to reviseNONMET and almost reverseMET the traditional accountancy concept of man-power as a resource consuming factor requiringNONMET regular payments , overheads in the form of heated , lighted , equippedNONMET workspaces and so on .
From the narrow accountancy viewpoint , people are a cost and it is desirable to keepMET this cost as low as possible .
In these terms it is very difficult to justify , for example , sendingNONMET a member of staff on a training course .
The training requiresNONMET expenditure and so also does the replacement for the person away .
Where is the return ?
The return is actually in the improved human resource but this is not readily measurable in terms which accountants use .
There have been two attempts to reduceMET human resources to this form of measurement ( Giles and Robinson , 1972 ) .
One is to acquireMET a human asset multiplier for each level of staff .
The multiplier for manual staff might be unity but it increasesNONMET with staff level and becomesNONMET three or more for management .
The other is to addNONMET together all the personnel costs for each kind of worker from the original job advertisement through to the retirement or redundancy payments .
The first does attemptMET to obtainMET a value , the second remainsNONMET essentially a cost and not a value .
It would be unduly optimistic to assumeMET that management skills have risenMET to a level such that costs undertakenMET can be assumedMET to be equivalent to value .
A less direct measure which is applicable only to the most senior management is to observeNONMET the fall or rise of the share price when a particular executive leaves or joinsMET a company .
This can be very high , for a large company a change in market value of millions of pounds is not unusual .
The most serious consequence of the accountancy view of man-power is that high level policy decision-making does not giveMET this factor sufficient weight .
For example , the main board of a company will have complete details of cost and values of physical resources such as buildings and equipment but relatively scanty data about the man-power which is their most important asset .
Indeed it will be describedMET almost entirely as a liability because the costs will be knownNONMET .
Similarly , broad factors such as the state of morale will again only be describedNONMET by negative features such as absenteeism , stoppages , strikes , low quality output and so on .
It is obvious that company output and projects must reflectMET the man-power and its performance level , but , if this is acknowledgedNONMET at all , it is only in brief verbal terms within , for example , the chairman's annual report .
The obsession , of current management , with measurement and the reduction of every variable to numbers for ease of computer manipulation has worsenedNONMET the situation .
Unfortunately there is no easy remedy .
Human resources are too complex a variable to be easily susceptible to measurement beyond the level of counting heads and trades .
Key variables such as the quality of staff at any level and the current morale are only expressible in general verbal descriptive terms .
It is generally accepted ( p. 145 ) that ‘ hygiene ’ type variables such as pay and working conditions can , if they are inappropriately specifiedNONMET , depressMET morale and motivation but they will not in themselves result in very high levels of these parameters .
Morale and motivation are influencedNONMET more by conditions of work in the sense of work variety opportunities and attitudes of management .
These factors are worthy of emphasis because in practice they are still dealtMET with very badly in many organisations and yet it takesMET little trouble or expertise to makeMET an enormous difference .
for example , very few senior managements takeMET the trouble to keepMET workers fully informedNONMET about policies and likely changes .
The result is excessive reliance on rumour and continuous speculation which is not only time-consuming but is also highly deleterious in morale terms .
The two human factors which can be unambiguously measuredMET are age and sex .
The age distribution of a work force is always an interesting and important source of information .
For most purposes a rectangular distribution is the most desirable because it providesNONMET the appropriate mix of youthful enthusiasm and ageing experience .
It also makesMET for regular changes as staff retireMET and are replacedMET .
Many distributions showMET a peak in a particular age group mainly associatedNONMET with taking on a large number of young people when the organisation was startedNONMET or reorganisedNONMET , this is not desirable because it leadsMET to excessive competition for promotion at particular stages .
These comments are obviously most relevant for work forces where there is little tendency to moveNONMET out , this is characteristic of a surprisingly large number of organisations in European countries and in Japan but much less so in the U.S.A. Stable work forces have their advantages in terms of familiarity with the enterprise and its peculiar needs but they do resultNONMET in problems if the market for the products is erratic or otherwise unpredictable .
This is particularly so in high technology e.g. design and construction of ships , aircraft , power stations and chemical plant , where the product unit is large and expensive and the variety of required expertise is extensive .
Some peaks of demand can be dealtMET with by usingMET consultants , but they tendNONMET to be expensive and do not always fitMET well with ill-defined but important factors such as the favoured style of the organisation .
In well ordered systems it may be possible to calculateNONMET the length of in-house experience requiredNONMET to achieveNONMET the required level of expertise in particular topics and compareNONMET this with the lead time for particular product requirements .
GivenNONMET time available to trainMET new staff it is not necessary to keepMET more than a nucleus in that particular expertise .
On the other hand , if there is usually insufficient notice of need it may be necessary to keepMET staff who have periods with little to do between projects .
It is also desirable to have the possibility of shiftingMET staff between design and operational duties .
This not only providesNONMET flexibility in the use of man-power , it also improvesNONMET communication .
These real difficulties of man-power utilisation are such as to forceMET many organisations to becomeNONMET larger and larger if they are to remainNONMET economic .
Size providesNONMET a cushion to the vicissitudes of markets but it createsNONMET other problems .
For example , difficulties of communications and in particular , how to inculcateNONMET the feeling within each individual that he and his performance are important to the organisation .
This is consideredNONMET in more detail in Chapter 3 .
Human resources should be fundamental to subjects such as ergonomics which are essentially people- centred but the concept remainsNONMET procedurally undeveloped at any level from a continent through countries , regions and companies down to particular working systems .
This is one reason why policy makers never seemNONMET to takeMET account fully of the people affectedNONMET by their decisions .
The design of procedures The increased importance of standardised informational support for both machines and operators has ledMET to the concept of procedures as a separate design issue within a system ( Fig. 1.30 ) .
Much of this information can be incorporatedNONMET in computer programs but there is also a need for extensive printed paper for the use of the operator .
This takesMET three main forms : checklists , routines and knowledge-texts .
The terminology in this field is not standardised .
Software might be restrictedMET , as in this book , to computer programs but it is sometimes used as the generic term to includeMET all sources of information .
Procedures is sometimes used for what are here calledNONMET routines and sometimes to indicateNONMET all the operator's information support except software .
The situation is further confused when some but not all the operator information support is itself computer- based .
Sometimes the term firm-ware is used .
However whatever the terminology usedNONMET there is a requirement for design effort .
The quality of procedures would be much improved if designers followed some simple guide-lines ( Table 1.16 ) .
Many documents are writtenNONMET on the implicit assumption that the reader is much like the writer in terms of expertise and style of thinking .
Similarly it is assumedMET that the conditions under which the reading will takeMET place are the same as those of writing which are usually a clean well-lit office .
They may have to be readNONMET in the open air , in rain and darkness or within a plant under oily , cramped , poorly litNONMET conditions .
The user probably has limitedNONMET expertise and he may be workingNONMET under various stress conditions .
The material on which the information is printed , the typeface used , the sequence , the structure and the format generally should reflectMET the conditions of use , ( Easterby and Zwaga , 1984 ) .
All these things can be achievedNONMET if it is acknowledged that all procedures should a validated by users under the normal conditions of use .
Checklists Checklists are usedNONMET in the pre-start mode , for routine maintenance and for fault-finding .
They normally takeMET the form of a series of questions or statements which the operator usesNONMET to guideMET and structureNONMET his inspection of the hardware and other system components .
The sequence is dictatedMET by the optimal order in which actions should be takenMET , for example in starting up an aircraft .
There are many situations when the order is of no great consequence , for example a safety audit of a new machine , and in this latter case some logical structure is neededNONMET .
As mentionedMET above , the logic of the design may not be the optimal basis if the way the operator thinksNONMET and acts is different .
Baker ( 1984 ) suggestsNONMET that four kinds of shortcoming emergeMET when checklists are validatedNONMET in the real situation .
The operator may deviateNONMET from the listed procedure because it may requireNONMET excessive moving about or because he is interrupted by the requirements of other tasks .
Systematic use of a checklist often revealsMET faults in work design such as inadequate access , visibility and labelling .
The checklist itself may be inconsistent , incomplete , imprecise or ambiguous .
Finally the checklist may have reprographic limitations such as inadequate vertical or horizontal structure , poor typefaces and insufficient linking of requirements , descriptions , remarks and tick-off points .
The International Ergonomics Association developed a general ergonomics checklist which is reproducedMET in Edholm ( 1967 ) .
There is a deceptive simplicity about such lists which requiresNONMET extensive effort to ensureNONMET a comprehensive but coherent content .
The context is , of course , the context of ergonomics as conceivedMET by the designers of the list .
Routines A routine is the most common form of instructional material .
The reader is requiredNONMET to followMET a series of steps which might , for example , introduceMET a change in the performance of a complex system .
Normally routines are single chains of instructions although it is possible to have some conditional branching .
Each step should be simple and completeNONMET in itself — preferably with some indication that successful completion has been achievedNONMET , for example the appearance or the change of colour of a signal light , or the noise of a motor starting or a change of pressure which indicatesNONMET that there has been a change in the flow of some material .
As mentionedNONMET earlier a routine can often be regardedMET as a written task description .
By definition and design intention routines are inflexible .
The user is intendedNONMET to behaveNONMET exactly according to their instruction .
No great skill or intellectual effort is required , which is one way of sayingMET that the human operator is being under-usedMET , but the purpose of a routine is usually to avoidMET common human error such as omittingNONMET a step or reversingMET steps .
In general the value of formal routines is precisely that the operator , left to himself , will not normally functionNONMET in such a systematic sequential manner .
Knowledge texts Knowledge is containedMET in documents which may varyNONMET from single sheet presentations to large manuals .
As instructional material it is indirect in that the reader is not necessarily told what to do , as in a routine .
Rather he is informedNONMET about the situation and the purpose of informingNONMET him is to provideNONMET a knowledge base from which he can work out his own actions .
Nevertheless , the relevant action remainsNONMET important and the knowledge providedNONMET should be carefully and stringently selected .
It is too easy to followMET the academic tradition and provideNONMET knowledge for its own sake .
The ‘ need to knowNONMET ’ criterion is crucial because unless it is applied , the operator can be overburdenedNONMET with unnecessary material .
Correspondingly the material should be structuredNONMET in terms of how it is most likely to be usedNONMET .
In this context the operator requiresNONMET a guide for action and not a scientific text-book .
It is invariably better to provideNONMET material diagrammatically , systematically or at least in well-structured short paragraphs rather than in flowing prose .
ConsiderMET for example how readily information about the relative position of streets is available from a map of a town centre rather than a verbal description of all the streets .
Such a map will enableNONMET the reader to work out for himself how to get from one location to another within the town .
NoteMET the enormous flexibility comparedNONMET with a routine which would tellMET him only how to getNONMET from one particular point to another .
A second important difference is that if he missesNONMET his place in a routine he will be totally lostMET , whereas if he happensNONMET to goNONMET in the wrong direction while usingNONMET a map he is still able to makeMET whatever correction is necessary .
However the map does requireNONMET more intellectual effort than does the routine not only in makingMET decisions about how to proceedMET but also in filteringMET out the required information from the massive irrelevance ( for a particular task ) which is equally available .
Thus , one would expectNONMET the use of the maps to be slower than the use of routines with the human performance being more versatile but less predictable .
With two-dimensional representations such as maps it remainsNONMET important to avoidMET too much homogeneity and provideNONMET substructure in the form of main roads and key buildings or other features such as rivers .
SeeNONMET , for example , Fig. 5.3 Manuals which may containMET maps , schematic diagrams and other materials warrantMET separate consideration .
The design of manuals A manual is usually in the form of a book or booklet which is sentNONMET with the hardware from the maker to the customer .
It is part of the communication package from the designer to the user .
Thus it is a particular form of job aid which providesNONMET the operator with information on a system and its performance .
The standard of manual design has traditionally been very low for several reasons .
For this purpose , the designer is too familiar with the product and he rarely takesMET the trouble to find out what the user really needsNONMET to knowNONMET .
Often the manual has to be providedNONMET hurriedly at the end of a project when the budget is runningMET out , and it is regardedMET as a tiresome chore still requiredNONMET after the essential design work has been completedNONMET .
The problem is particularly acute for computers .
Manuals for cars , machine tools and so on are poor but at least it is possible to observeNONMET the mechanisms and their functions .
Most computer operators do not knowNONMET or wishNONMET to knowNONMET about the mechanisms , and in any case these are not accessible to vision and manipulation .
The computer operator is entirely dependent on the manual , at least in the early stages of gainingNONMET familiarity with the system and its functions .
He is usually very badly servedMET although the principles of manual design are well knownNONMET .
For most systems the manual is best dividedMET into parts as indicatedNONMET in Table 1.17 .
The first part should be a general introduction which orientatesNONMET the readers towards the system , its purpose , its functional structure and mode of operation and its performance limits .
This should be followedMET by a separate section on how to setMET the system up in the first place and how to checkNONMET that it is workingMET properly .
If it is fairly small it may be necessary to describeNONMET how to unpackNONMET it , fixNONMET it into position , connectNONMET it to power supplies and start it up .
If it is large , the emphasis will be on the start up procedure .
The section describingMET the operation of the system should coverMET not only how the system operates but also how the user can operateNONMET it .
Extensive use of line drawings , schematic diagrams , algorithmic lists is desirable , and where prose is usedNONMET this also should be structuredNONMET into short sentences with meaningful separation into paragraphs .
The maintenance section should indicateNONMET what , if anything , the operator is expected to do and the symptoms which indicateNONMET that more specialist maintenance skills are requiredNONMET .
Tables subdivided into Faults/Reasons/ Remedies can be extremely helpful .
Parts lists including description reference numbers and sometimes drawings are necessary if the user is expected to dealMET with his own replacements .
A standard fault is to assumeMET that the reader is familiar with the jargon which the designer habitually usesNONMET .
A glossary of terms and acronyms usedNONMET can be very helpful not only to the reader but also to the writer who is forcedMET to considerMET carefully how he is usingNONMET various technical terms .
Finally , all manuals should endNONMET with an index which supplementsNONMET the table of contents at the beginning .
The School Framework A Model to Link Personality Characteristics to a Preference for Science John Head Introduction In recent years there has been a steady accumulation of evidence that personality and allied affective factors playMET a crucial role in determining subject choice and student success .
Unfortunately , this evidence has tendedNONMET to be fragmentary , a collection of separate , discrete pieces of information lackingNONMET a synthesizing theory to provideNONMET cohesion and predictive power .
The few models which have been developedNONMET to date may have been correct as far as they goMET but are clearly incomplete .
For example Roe ( 1952 ) , Eiduson ( 1962 ) and McClelland ( 1962 ) suggestedNONMET that male scientists often experienced a lonely childhood , perhaps suffering social isolation through illness or family circumstances , so that they developedNONMET a strong interest in their surrounding material world and a below average interest in other people and relationships .
Maslow ( 1966 ) and Hudson ( 1966 and 1968 ) sawMET science as providingNONMET an emotionally undemanding activity appealingMET to boys movingMET from the calm of latency to the turbulence of adolescence .
Even if these descriptions are valid they still leaveMET open a number of questions , particularly why the same mechanisms do not operateMET with girls .
ArisingMET from the evidence in the literature and from our empirical studies at Chelsea College it is now possible to offerNONMET a model which is compatible with all the evidence and which also has considerable predictive potential .
What we knowNONMET about persons choosingNONMET science The evidence for an association between personality characteristics and an interest in science has been more fully reviewedNONMET by Head ( 1979 ) .
We needNONMET now only takeMET note of the most salient features .
The most obvious one is that of sex differences .
The predominance of males , particularly in the physical sciences and engineering , throughout the Western world can no longer be satisfactorily attributedNONMET to cognitive differences , which are too small , nor to institutional factors .
Equal opportunity in education and employment has not madeMET science any more popular with women .
Furthermore , the characteristics of those students who do optNONMET for science show clear sex differences .
Male scientists , both science students and matureMET , professional scientists , tendNONMET to be emotionally reticent , dislikingNONMET overt emotional expression in others and themselves , and depending upon their partners in personal relationships to takeMET the emotional initiatives .
They will also tendNONMET to be authoritarian , conservative and controlled in their thinking .
These differences can be seenMET quite early on ; we have foundMET boys aged 14 years who were optingNONMET for science to be significantly more authoritarian than their peers .
Girls choosingNONMET science are not particularly emotionally reticent or rigid in their thinking , although they do seemNONMET to have low self-esteem in terms of being socially and sexually attractive .
We also knowNONMET that at about the age of 13 a very high proportion of boys are attractedMET to science and scientific careers .
Thereafter , there is a steady decline of interest in science and this disillusionment extendsMET right through the secondary-school years and into the undergraduate period .
In contrast , only a minority of girls expressMET an interest in science at any age but there is no obvious swing from science in the middle and late teens .
Some further evidence has comeMET from our use of sentence completion tests with secondary-school pupils as part of our research programme at Chelsea .
Analysis of these responses providesNONMET further information on sex differences and between those optingNONMET for different subjects .
For example , girls at the age of 12 and 14 years seemNONMET to takeMET a more mature attitude to personal relationships , seeingMET their complexity and reciprocal nature , while boys are more exploitative .
In relation to the sentence stem ‘ A girl and her mother … ’ , girls often produceMET responses like ‘ often goMET through a bad patch for a year but once they learnNONMET to understandNONMET each other , becomeNONMET the best of friends ’ or ‘ can helpNONMET each other with their problems ’ .
Similar questions , when askedNONMET of boys , tendNONMET to produceMET banal responses or exploitative ones , for example the parent is seenMET as the source of money .
In contrast , boys seemNONMET to have a firmer self-identity and a clearer ambition showingMET more insight in response to sentence stems such as ‘ My main problem is … ’ and ‘ He/she feltMET proud that … ’ .
Such findings giveMET us some clues about the characteristics of boys and girls of these ages .
If we compareNONMET boys of 14 years of age who optNONMET for science with other boys , we findMET that the former have very cut-and-dried views on many issues .
For example , they takeMET the view that ‘ criminals should be severely punishedNONMET ’ or that ‘ anyone who is unpopular deservesNONMET his fate ’ .
To the sentence stem ‘ When a child will not joinMET in group activities … ’ , these boys gaveMET responses likeNONMET ‘ he is selfish ’ , ‘ he must be stupid ’ , ‘ he deservesNONMET to be unpopular ’ .
In contrast , other boys and most girls ponderedNONMET the possible causes and ways of integratingNONMET the child into the group .
The science boys seemedNONMET to possessMET few doubts or uncertainties , they offeredNONMET clear-cut answers .
It was this evidence which suggestedMET the possible model for subject choice in terms of ego-identity achievement .
Ego-identity in adolescence This model was originally postulatedNONMET by Erikson ( 1965 ) and then developedNONMET by Marcia ( 1966 and 1976 ) .
Erikson suggestsMET that at different phases of life an individual facesMET a particular psycho-social problem which needsNONMET to be resolvedNONMET before movingMET on to the next phase .
For adolescents the acquisition of a clear ego-identity is the crucial task .
At the beginning of adolescence , the individual is a dependent within the family and the school .
By the end of adolescence he [ or she ] needsNONMET to makeMET choices about career , life-style , personal relationships and ideologies .
The ego-identity of that person is shapedMET by these choices .
Erikson does not suggestNONMET that the development of an ego-identity is a once-and-for-all issue .
Some problems about identity ariseMET with the young child in the context of home and school , and others occurNONMET in later life , for example on retirement .
Nevertheless , adolescence is the time when ego-identity development inevitably dominatesMET the personal development of the individual for a while .
The adolescent does not , however , need to achieveNONMET a clear ego-identity on all topics at one time .
He [ or she ] may have a clear identity in respect to his [ or her ] career but still be unresolved in regard to personal relationships and ideology .
In this article we are concerned with ego-identity achievement in respect to careerNONMET .
Marcia has putMET more detail onto the Erikson model and suggestsNONMET that in goingMET from the initial ego- diffusion condition to that of having achievedNONMET ego-identity , two processes are involvedNONMET : crisis and commitment .
Crisis in this context describesMET a period of intensive self-examination in which one's beliefs and values are re-examinedNONMET .
Commitment meansMET that the individual has acquiredMET clear and firm beliefs both about himself [ or herself ] and the world .
Figure 16.1 indicatesMET a number of possible routes to ego-identity achievements .
A person may undergoNONMET crisis and commitment simultaneously and progress by route A. An alternative is to undergoNONMET a period of considerable self-doubt and self-examination in which all one's beliefs tendNONMET to be very fluid , a period knownNONMET as moratorium , before acquiringMET beliefs for oneself and ego-identity is achievedNONMET ( route B ) .
A further possibility is that the individual may , at least for a time , hold onto beliefs and values takenMET without question from others , for example parents , teachers , peers .
This condition is knownNONMET as foreclosure .
Eventually these persons might have to face up to period of crisis , of self-examination , and so achieveNONMET ego-identity by route C. However , foreclosure does offerMET an escape route and an individual might postponeNONMET indefinitely any real self-examination by clingingMET rigidly to his [ or her ] beliefs and values ( route D ) .
Ego-identity and Choosing Science We can now makeMET the link between this model of adolescent development and subject choice in schools .
For boys at the foreclosure stage , science is likely to be appealing .
The physical sciences in particular , offerMET a conventional career choice which is likely to winMET approval from parents , teachers and peers .
They will tendNONMET to regardMET the overt expression of emotions , includingNONMET much such expression in the arts , as being soft and feminine .
Science , with its masculine image , makesMET little emotional demand on an individual and seemsNONMET to offerMET clear , precise answers to problems .
OptingNONMET for science will permitMET and possibly reinforceMET emotional reticence .
For a girl at the foreclosure stage the situation is very different .
There is evidence that girls tendNONMET to be socializedNONMET into adult roles more through their potential of becomingNONMET a mother and housewife than through their career ( Douvan and Adelson , 1966 ) .
Furthermore , these girls will tendNONMET to goMET into a career with a feminine image , one which already attractsMET many girls .
Consequently , very few girls at the foreclosure stage will enterMET science unless they receiveNONMET considerable encouragement and a model to do so from their parents and their school .
Neither boys nor girls at the moratorium stage are likely to be attractedMET to the science that is usually presentedMET in our schools .
They are at a stage when they are likely to be concerned with a variety of complex issues ; the meaning of life , the existence of God , ideologies , their emerging sexuality , their future career and life-style — too often science is seenMET as being purely instrumental with nothing to contributeMET to these debates .
Science , somehow , seemsNONMET to be scarcely relevant to the most important issues in our life .
A proportion of both boys and girls at ego-identity achievement stage will chooseMET science .
In fact , most girls enteringMET science are probably at this stage as they will needNONMET some self-examination and sense of commitment to makeMET this unconventional choice .
However , only a minority of adolescents will have reachedMET the ego-identity achievement stage at the age when most pupils have to makeMET crucial decisions about subject choice at school .
This model seemsNONMET to explainMET our observations .
A large number of boys , particularly at the foreclosure stage , are initially attractedMET to science but there is a drift away throughout later adolescence as they undergoNONMET some crisis .
The preponderance of boys at the foreclosure stage will yieldMET the rigid , authoritarian attitudes often associatedNONMET with scientists .
The few girls who enterMET science will not usually showNONMET these foreclosure characteristics .
Effects of Curriculum Changes The real use of this model linkingMET personality development to subject choice is that it allowsMET us to makeMET predictions about how pupils might reactMET to changes in school science curriculum and school organization .
We can considerMET three possible changes : 1 Delaying subject choice : Britain is unusual in askingNONMET pupils to makeMET crucial choices about subject options in the 13–16 age range .
These decisions can only be reversedMET with great difficulty .
What effect would delaying the choice makeMET ?
In the development through the years of adolescence the number of foreclosure pupils will diminishNONMET , hence the recruitment of boys into science would be cutMET .
More boys and girls will have reachedMET the ego-identity achievement stage and a proportion of these will goMET into science .
Overall there would be a reduction in the number of students choosingNONMET science , but those who do so chooseNONMET will be more likely to stayMET happily in the subject and to possessNONMET more flexible minds .
The quantitative loss would be metMET by a qualitative improvement .
2 GivingMET science a more feminine image : It is sometimes arguedNONMET that science textbooks are sexist in showingMET illustrations of boys , rather than girls , doing practical work in the laboratory , and so forth .
What effect would a deliberate attempt to changeMET this image have ?
It might makeMET it easier for girls at the foreclosure stage to acceptNONMET science so recruitment might increaseNONMET .
Some of these girls might , however , driftMET away again when they reachMET their crisis period .
Unless the change in image was immense , boys would probably not be affectedNONMET , science would still be an obvious , acceptable choice for a boy .
Overall there would be some increase in the recruitment of girls , but no qualitative improvement .
3 EmphasizingMET the applications and relevance of science : To obtainNONMET a major qualitative improvement to recruitment in science with more girls and with students possessingMET imaginative , flexible minds it would be necessary to makeMET science appealing to boys and girls at the moratorium stage .
In that event science must be seenMET to be relevant to the issues which concernNONMET them .
The probable implication is that science would needNONMET to be presentedMET in the context of the needs of society and individuals .
Probably a case-study approach involvingNONMET the application of science , and the interaction with other disciplines , would be neededNONMET .
Our knowledge about the girls ' concern with personal relationships suggestsMET that the  introduction of some elements of the social sciences into the case studies might proveNONMET attractive .
Is it possible to changeMET school science in this fashion and still preserveMET the essential character of science itself ?
Clearly there would needNONMET to be some drastic pruning of content .
Perhaps science teachers should not attemptNONMET to coverMET their subjects so comprehensively .
A history teacher is content to coverMET the history of one country or continent over a few decades .
Perhaps we must makeMET similar choices .
It is interesting to noticeNONMET that the Association for Science Education ( 1979 ) policy statement in Britain and the proposals on school physics comingMET from the Institute for Science Education ( IPN ) in Kiel are advocatingMET such changes .
The difference is that we are now offeringNONMET a formal psychological model to suggestNONMET that if we wantNONMET to reduceMET the current encapsulation of science , if we wantNONMET to recruitMET a different sort of student , then certain curriculum changes are neededNONMET .
Girl Friendly Science and the Girl Friendly School Judith Whyte Approximately three times as many boys as girls takeMET O level physics and approximately four times as many takeMET CSE physics .
Over 90 per cent of entries in all technical subjects are from boys .
This meansMET that schoolgirls are ineligible for a wide range of courses in further and higher education and for entry to occupations requiringNONMET a scientific or technical base .
Female exclusion from science and technology , even if it is apparently by girls ' own choice , also meansMET that as citizens their ability to understandNONMET and controlMET their environment is limited .
Nevertheless , most schools considerMET they are already providingNONMET equal opportunities by neutral treatment  of the two sexes ( Bloomfield , 1984 ) .
In effect , ignoringNONMET the effects of gender in this way merely reinforcesMET stereotyping because it does nothing to challengeMET the definition of certain aspects of the curriculum as masculine or feminine .
Girls  Into Science and Technology ( GIST ) was the first major schools-based project addressingMET problems of sex stereotyping at school , and was an example of ‘ action research ’ in education ; the project simultaneously tookMET action to improveNONMET girls ' achievement in science and technology and investigatedMET the reasons for their under-achievement .
The project team collaboratedMET with teachers in eight co-educational comprehensive schools in the Greater Manchester area to deviseNONMET and implementNONMET intervention strategies designedMET to improveNONMET girls ' attitudes to the physical sciences and technical subjects .
Two other schools were involvedNONMET as controlsMET where attitude testing but no interventions tookMET place .
[ … ] The approach was collaborative : teachers were invitedNONMET to workNONMET with the team as equal partners in the attempts both to investigateNONMET and findMET solutions to the GIST problem .
However , very few of the teachers even recognized the issue as one of professional concern at the start of the project , and most of the first two years was spentMET in establishingNONMET the educational importance of the issue and workingNONMET towards the  development of feasible intervention strategies .
The project and its outcomes have been fully describedNONMET elsewhere ( Smail et al .
, 1982 ; Kelly , Whyte and Smail , 1984 ; Whyte in press ) .
GIST had more success in alteringNONMET children's attitudes than their subject choices , suggestingNONMET that it is easier to changeMET attitudes and beliefs than actual behaviour .
Pupils in action schools becameNONMET markedly less stereotyped than pupils in control schools .
They also had slightly more positive attitudes towards science and scientists and were less likely to defineMET them as exclusively masculine .
Despite some evidence of change in teachers ' attitudes and behaviour , they themselves were reluctant to admitMET that the project had influencedNONMET them .
According to an evaluation report this may reflectMET an unwillingness to admitMET that in the past schools have been sex biased ( Payne , Cuff and Hustler , 1984 ) .
The GIST hypothesis was that female under-achievement in science and technology is at least partly socially constructedMET by the school , an hypothesis basedMET on research evidence as well as critical feminist analysis ( seeMET , for example , Kelly , 1981 ) .
During the project there was a shift away from locatingMET the issue as one of girls ' motivation towards attempts to changeMET the nature of school science .
One of the main gains from the GIST project has been the clarification of what is meantMET by a ‘ girl friendly ’ , science , that is a science which will appealMET equally to the interests and concerns of girls as well as boys .
[ … ] MakingMET Science More Girl Friendly Several interventions were designedMET to makeMET science more girl friendly .
Schools and teachers triedMET curriculum development to buildMET on girls ' science interests , changing patterns of classroom interaction , single sex groups and classes .
The largest scale intervention was the VISTA programme , which consistedNONMET of women scientists and technologists visiting schools to talkNONMET to children about an aspect of their jobs already being coveredMET in the school science syllabus .
VISTA madeMET science more girl friendly in two ways : both boys and girls were offeredNONMET an attractive image of a competent woman scientist , and talks concentrated on social and industrial applications of science , an element too often missing from science at school .
One school was so impressed by the children's positive reactions that they completely revamped the science work in the first two years to includeMET more social and human applications of science .
The survey of children's attitudes helped here : research such as Ormerod's ( 1971 ; Ormerod and Duckworth , 1975 ) had shownMET that girls were interested in the social implications of science , but did not tellNONMET teachers what the desirable teaching approach might be in practice .
Would science in the home be a starter ?
A question from our survey askedMET children whether they would likeNONMET to knowNONMET more about how a vacuum cleaner works ; hardly anyone did , and girls were even less curious than boys .
This toldMET us that any simplistic assumptions about featuringNONMET ‘ female ’ domestic interests in science would probably meetMET with failure .
The rest of the questionnaire about science curiosity showedMET that all the children were enthusiastic about learning science , and that girls were keen to knowNONMET more about nature , the environment and medical science .
Over 50 per cent , and in some cases over 60 per cent saidNONMET they would likeNONMET to learnNONMET about the human heart , germs and illnesses , how our muscles work , what food is good for you , life in the sea , what makesMET a rainbow appearNONMET and how a record is madeNONMET .
It was helpful that these topics also interested boys .
At present the science curriculum is structuredMET around physical science interests , on which boys are keener ( how motor cars work , atoms and molecules ) ; we were able to recommendNONMET that teaching build on the overlapping interests of the two sexes , because girls as well as boys wantNONMET to knowNONMET more about human biology and spectacular features of the environment ( animals in the jungle , volcanoes and earthquakes , acids and chemicals ) .
The less immediately attractive parts of science could be approachedMET through these interests , for instance teaching ‘ forces ’ by beginningNONMET with the action of muscles in the human arm , and ‘ light ’ via the dissection of a bull's eye .
When women scientists employNONMET such approaches , and describeNONMET their own work , as happenedNONMET during the VISTA programme , girls are receivingNONMET double encouragement .
These examples indicateMET some of the features of girl friendly science : it buildsMET on girls ' interests , not just boys ' ; it explicitly encouragesMET girls to seeMET themselves as potential scientists , and it includesMET some of the social and human implications and applications of science .
Other GIST Interventions All the GIST schools were mixed comprehensives , and at first teachers were most unwilling to separateNONMET boys and girls at all , on the grounds that it ranMET counter to their co-educational comprehensive philosophy .
Then certain teachers were particularly struckMET by the evidence of large differences in the interests and experience children broughtMET with them to school .
Girls had far less ‘ tinkering ’ experience than boys and the connection with their lesser interest in topics like ‘ how electricity is producedNONMET ’ seemedNONMET obvious .
Several special science or craft clubs were organizedNONMET in the lunch hour for girls only and in two schools teachers planned single-sex teaching .
As we shall seeMET , it was in these two schools that the largest measurable changes of attitude and option choice occurredNONMET .
For a more girl friendly science , it seemsNONMET vital that teachers should comeMET to seeMET that when all the masculine packaging , evident in textbooks and resources as well as teachers ' and boys ' behaviour in the classroom , is removedMET , girls can be very enthusiastic about science .
[ … ] Alison Kelly seesMET at least four distinct senses in which it can be arguedNONMET that science is masculine .
First , the pupils , teachers and practitioners of science are overwhelmingly male in terms of numbers ; second , school science is packagedMET and presented to appealMET to boys , not girls ; third , classroom behaviours and interaction operateMET to reconstructMET science as a male activity , and finally it has been suggestedNONMET that ‘ scientific ’ thinking embodiesNONMET an intrinsically masculine world view .
The GIST interventions describedNONMET above relateNONMET to three of these : VISTA women , albeit briefly and temporarily , redressedNONMET the numerical balance by offeringNONMET female role models of practising scientists ; VISTA and the curriculum development which followedMET involved a limited ‘ repackaging ’ of science to removeMET its exclusively masculine appeal , and the single-sex classes and classroom observation showedMET how science comesMET to be definedMET as ‘ masculine ’ in the mixed school .
The fourth point , the idea that science is intrinsically masculine , can be sustainedMET only by clinging to an irredeemably narrow conception of science and scientific thinking .
The industrial and social impact of science on health , on people , on the environment , a focus on the beauty and complexity of the natural world , are notable omissions from the school science syllabus .
Girls are not uninterested in science , they are bored by the limited version of it they meetMET in school .
One of the purposes of an extended period of single-sex science teaching might be to letNONMET teachers seeMET how girls approach scientific matters , and to discoverMET , what may well be the case , that girls are just as capable of ‘ scientific thinking ’ as boys .
Margaret Spear , in a different study from the one reported in this volume , foundMET that for identical work boys were markedNONMET higher than girls for supposed understanding of principles , aptitude for science and O level suitability ( Spear , 1984 ) .
AttemptingNONMET to integrateNONMET under fives Policy in Islington , 1983–8 Margaret Boushel , Clare Debenham , Lisa Dresner and Anna Gorbach During the 1980s Margaret Boushel , Claire Debenham , Lisa Dresner and Anna Gorbach workedNONMET in the London borough of Islington within social services for pre-school children .
This chapter is an account of the way they perceivedMET attempts to  developNONMET integrated provision for under fives and the barriers in attitudes and systems which were encounteredMET .
The first section providesMET an overview of provision and services in 1983 .
The next section describesMET attempts to createNONMET a clear under policy .
The third section looksMET at the faltering progress towards integrated services .
The fourth section examinesMET the formidable barriers that were posedNONMET by reorganisation of social services , local authority cuts and the demise of the Inner London Education Authority .
The chapter concludesMET with a mixture of resignation and determination .
BACKGROUND : UNDER- SERVICES IN ISLINGTON , 1983 Islington is a multi-ethnic , inner city London borough with a child population of 29,000 .
In 1982 , 44 per cent of under fives in Islington had the use of an under facility , 29 per cent on a full-time and 15 per cent on a part-time basis .
Between 1982 and 1988 provision gradually increasedNONMET , so that by 1988 there were 12 children's day centres , about 70 playgroups and 350 assisted child-minding places fundedNONMET partially or totally by the Social Services Department , and 1,075 full-time and 824 part-time places in nursery schools fundedNONMET by the Inner London Education Authority .
The Beacon Nursery , a local Mencap project , offered care five days per week to children over one year of age categorised as having severe learning difficulties .
Unlike council day centres , playgroups or community nurseries , the Beacon Nursery was free .
Children were collectedNONMET from home by special bus and places were available on demand .
The Beacon had been in existence for many years and in the past had cateredNONMET for up to thirty children with a wide range of disabilities and needs .
By 1983 it had half that number on roll .
Since 1983 numbers at the Beacon continuedNONMET to fallMET as it was increasingly seenMET as a resource for children with severe and multiple disabilities .
In addition the Elfreda Rathbone organisation , a voluntary organisation helping people with learning disabilities , ranMET a free day nursery in the borough for a small number of children with learning difficulties .
Some integrated services emergedMET in the early 1980s — one playscheme was  developedNONMET through a parent's initiative , and an integrated adventure playground was establishedNONMET by a voluntary organisation .
Workers from the integrated playscheme subsequently supported a local special school in integratingNONMET under fives into a playgroup .
In addition to its mainstream schools , the borough includedNONMET five special schools providingNONMET primary and secondary education to children with special needs from Islington and neighbouring boroughs — one for children with moderate learning difficulties , one for children with severe learning difficulties , one for children with emotional and behavioural difficulties , one for autistic children , and one for children with physical disabilities .
In 1983 three of these offered nursery places to children from the age of 2 .
The children usingNONMET all of these services cameNONMET from a wide range of ethnic backgrounds , though rarely was this actively and positively reflectedMET in the type of care providedNONMET or the ethnic background of their carers .
Residential units By 1983 residential services were designedMET with ‘ care in the community ’ in mind , but most were basedNONMET in specialist settings .
For example , Field End House had been open for three years as a specialist unit for children with learning difficulties , and was designedMET to offerNONMET respite ‘ round the clock ’ care .
Parents had foughtMET for this as a local resource to preventNONMET the need for children to be placedNONMET in long-stay placements far from home .
By 1988 Field End had been joinedNONMET by another specialist children's respite care unit at Leigh Road .
The Social Services Department also provided thirteen short-term and long-term residential units for children in care ( by 1988 their number had been reducedMET to eleven ) , none with wheelchair access and only one with any experience of caring for children with learning difficulties .
The Community Health Team The Community Health Team had major responsibility for assessingNONMET children and recommendingNONMET provision .
It includedNONMET physiotherapists , occupational and speech therapists , doctors , psychologists and a specialist health visitor .
They were joinedNONMET in the network by specialist teachers , fundedNONMET by the ILEA and basedNONMET in the special schools , who visitedNONMET children at home before they were due to startNONMET school .
This group of people met on a regular basis to coordinateMET services and discussNONMET professional issues .
Discussion of services to individual children also tookMET place .
This includedNONMET decidingNONMET between day care or school , and parents ' attitudes to different options .
Often a member of the group was delegatedNONMET to adviseNONMET parents on a course of action .
The Community Health Team aim was to ensureNONMET a place of treatment for children from the earliest possible age , to enableNONMET them to developNONMET to their fullest potential .
They were , however , an all-White group , operatingMET without directly involvingNONMET parents and were generally committedNONMET to specialist care in the community .
They gaveMET support to the Beacon and Elfreda Rathbone nurseries and most members sawMET these settings as the best places to ‘ treatNONMET ’ children .
Because of their early contact with parents they often had considerable influence in steering parents towards specialist provision .
The Special Services Team In the early 1980s social workers were fundedNONMET jointly by the ILEA and Islington Social Services Department to workNONMET with children attendingNONMET two special schools and two specialist units for ‘ partially hearingNONMET ’ children .
These social workers were basedNONMET in the borough's Special Services Team .
They all workedNONMET with some under fives attendingNONMET the schools they coveredMET .
They were aware of a number of pre-school children who did not have adequate access to resources or support when parents and professionals were becomingNONMET aware of the possible extent and implications of the disability .
When a vacancy aroseMET within this group of social workers in 1983 it was decidedNONMET to appointNONMET someone specialisingNONMET in work with under fives with special needs .
This might have had the effect of drawing families into the specialist system at an earlier stage .
Instead , for a number of reasons , it provedNONMET to be a key step in the development of the debate about integration in Islington .
First , the post was not attachedMET to any specialist institution .
There was an expectation but not a contractual obligation that the postholder would workNONMET closely with the Beacon Nursery .
Second , the worker had an alternative peer group of under workers who were key figures in controlling access to all other under- facilities .
Third , the worker was committedNONMET to the idea that treatment of a medical or disabling condition should not takeMET precedence over the child's social , emotional and cultural needs .
There was now a new worker in the network who also madeMET an early relationship with families but who could presentNONMET a broader choice of day care to parents .
ATTEMPTINGNONMET AN INTEGRATION POLICY The Labour Council , electedNONMET in 1982 , had as a stated policy aim that every child whose parents so wishedNONMET was entitled to a pre-school place of some sort .
This ledMET to the initiation of an under- review .
The review team , setMET up under the auspices of the Social Services Committee , includedNONMET councillors , senior departmental management and representatives of the children's day centre organisers and under social workers in its membership .
It proposedNONMET a network of under- centres throughout the borough — an idea which the under- workers had been anxious to promoteNONMET for some time .
Day care in each area would be organisedNONMET and coordinated through the children's day centres which would also provideNONMET information , support and resources to parents .
The review had madeMET no mention of children with special needs .
The specialist social worker and another under- worker with a personal interest in the issues undertookNONMET a supplementary review to examineNONMET resources for these children .
They interviewedNONMET parents , specialist professionals and mainstream day-care workers and they designedMET a questionnaire which was completedNONMET by workers in a large proportion of mainstream council services and voluntary organisations , as well as by some child-minders .
Broadly , the survey confirmedMET that parents of children with special needs had not been givenMET a real choice of placement , and that they had to fightMET hard for mainstream provision if this was their choice .
Parents wanted to be part of the decision-making and did not feelMET that they were .
Many commented on lack of information about the range of facilities on offer .
One Afro-Caribbean woman described how she feltMET that she was never givenMET a choice of provision for her son , and objected to being toldNONMET he should be in a specialist nursery for his own good .
She foughtMET hard to getMET him a part-time playgroup place in the group his older brother attended .
Because the group had knownNONMET her and her children for some time they agreedNONMET to ‘ have a go ’ and the placement wentMET ahead .
She commentedNONMET : I had to fightMET every step of the way for this .
No one toldNONMET me about it , and no one wantedNONMET him to have it .
I knewNONMET it was right for him — this is where he learntNONMET to join in and be like other children .
It doesn't matterNONMET that he's not like them .
I knowNONMET what is right for my child , but I'm not supposed to sayNONMET .
Parents also wanted an increased availability of specialist ‘ therapy ’ time , but wantedNONMET it to be usedNONMET in a more flexible way .
Some parents were very worried that more integrated settings would leadMET to lack of attention for children with special needs .
Definitions of ‘ special needs ’ varied widely in the questionnaire responses — some definingNONMET it as children with disabilities , some including children with behavioural and emotional problems and some including children whose first language was not English .
This madeMET the survey difficult to interpretNONMET .
The findings were documentedNONMET in a report A Place For All Our Children ( CCUF 1983 ) and an analysis was preparedNONMET of the practical and bureaucratic problems in gainingNONMET an ordinary childcare place for a child with special needs , with suggestions for how these might be overcomeNONMET .
These ideas were informedMET by a paper which had already been producedMET by an active member of the local Mencap group , who had previously triedNONMET to generateMET the debate within the Community Health Service through the Mencap committee .
The conference : ‘ A place for all our children' As a result of this work the Coordinating Committee for Under Fives ( CCUF ) , an umbrella organisation of statutory and voluntary sector groups and individuals providingNONMET a service to under fives , decided to organiseNONMET a conference to lookMET at the issues of integration of special needsNONMET children within mainstream provision .
Prior to the conference various groups met to produceMET short contributions to the debate .
These includedNONMET parents , under- workers , specialist workers , children's day centre organisers and playgroups organisers .
Each of these groups cameMET up with a list of proposals which were sentNONMET to everyone attendingNONMET .
About 230 people attendedNONMET the conference , held in April 1985 .
Workshops facilitatedNONMET by the speakers and the conference organisingNONMET group examined integration policies , overcomingNONMET practical problems for children in integrated provision and available sources of information .
The conference madeMET the following recommendations : 1 For a formal , universal information system , coveringMET local and specialist resources .
2 For children's needs to be consideredMET with parents and their wishes acknowledged and recognised .
3 For employment of extra staff where neededNONMET , and employment of peripatetic special needsNONMET workers .
4 For availability of money for equipment , toys and adaptations .
5 For enhanced payments to child-minders caringNONMET for children with special needs .
6 For priority status for children with special needs in order to facilitateNONMET access to ordinary provision .
7 For training facilities for staff in ordinary provision , specialist provision and child-minders .
8 For greater communication and sharing of resources between ordinary and specialist provision .
9 For therapeutic and professional staff to reflectMET the cultural backgrounds of the children , and that for all children , including those with special needs , their day-care environment and activities to expressMET a consciousness of the multicultural society in Islington .
It was madeMET clear that all of the above areas needed fundingNONMET from health , education and social services before they could be implementedNONMET .
Finally , it was feltMET that unless the attitudes of advisers and information-givers becameNONMET more positive towards integration , none of the recommendations could be effective .
II THE FIRST CRITIQUE Unity had been easy during the Resistance , because relationships were almost always man-to-man .
Over against the German army or the Vichy government , where social generality ruled , as it does in all machines of state , the Resistance offeredMET the rare phenomenon of historical action which remained personal .
The psychological and moral elements of political action were almost the only ones to appearMET here , which is why intellectuals least inclined to politics were to be seenMET in the Resistance .
The Resistance was a unique experience for them , and they wantedNONMET to preserveMET its experience in the new French politics because this experience brokeMET away from the famous dilemma of being and doing , which confrontsMET all intellectuals in the face of action … .
It is only too obvious that this balance between action and personal life was intimately bound up with the conditions of clandestine action and could not surviveMET it .
And in this sense it must be saidMET that the Resistance experience , by makingMET us believeNONMET that politics is a relationship between man and man or between consciousnesses , fosteredMET our illusions of 1939 and masked the truth of the incredible power of history which the Occupation taughtMET us in another connection .
If by 1945 Merleau-ponty had here already indicated the historical basis for what was to becomeNONMET Sartre's project in the Critique , the theoretical problem that followedMET was how to uniteMET orthodox Marxist concepts of economic determinism and historical necessity with the individualism of Sartre's earlier work , that is the existentialist notion of the authentic self and the possibility of choosingNONMET one's own freedom : how to relocateMET human practice within historical determinism , to reconcileMET the individual with the social , the idea of agency with that of necessity , or freedom with history ?
For Marxist or Hegelian thought , such an age-old contradiction ought to be resolvable through the operations of dialectical logic .
CitingNONMET Marx's famous remark in The Eighteenth Brumaire , ‘ Men makeMET their own History … but under circumstances … given and transmitted from the past ’ , Sartre suggestedNONMET that this impliedNONMET ‘ the permanent and dialectical unity of freedom and necessity , ( I , 35 ) .
Accordingly , he attemptedNONMET to shiftMET Marxism away from orthodox theories of an absolute determinism towards the primacy of a concept of ‘ History ’ which , while still a totality as it had been for Lukács , a process with a determinate meaning and end , could also includeMET a concept of human agency and thus articulateMET the individual with the social , freedom with determinism .
Today , Sartre's voluntarism is to some extent returningMET to favourNONMET as the result of a desire to retrieveMET the categories of agency and the subject , which goesMET together with the wish to getMET out of the apparently totalizing systems of Adorno , Althusser or Foucault .
Sartre's stress on the role of the subject also findsMET approval because many of those no longer preparedMET to argueNONMET for a general theory of history as the progress of a single narrative of class- struggle , have begunNONMET to argueNONMET instead for a return of its correlative , the subject , almost as if it was the next best thing in the absence of history itself .
But it still leavesMET us with the crucial problem that Sartre had to solveNONMET , namely how to linkMET human consciousness with the processes of history so that the former can be saidNONMET to be the agent of the latter .
How could this takeMET place ?
As Sartre had putMET it in What is Literature ?
: ‘ Never has homo faber better understood that he has madeMET history and never has he feltMET so powerless before history ’ .
How can man make history if at the same time it is history which makesMET him ?
Sartre consideredMET that orthodox dialectical materialism takesMET the easy way out by merely eliminatingMET the first in favour of the second , makingMET man a passive product entirely determinedNONMET by economic circumstances .
Unwilling to followMET Merleau-Ponty by droppingMET the second in favour of the first , Sartre arguedNONMET that it was possible for man to be both at once through the movement of praxis , that is intentional actions which produceMET material effects .
Its corollary , whereby praxis becomesNONMET determining history , he calledNONMET the ‘ practico- inert ’ , by which he meantNONMET the material circumstances that have themselves been createdNONMET by previous praxes and which form the conditions for new praxis .
The individual is thus both totalizer and totalizedNONMET , deftly uniting freedom with necessity .
Though this neatly solvesMET the problem of how man can makeMET history while at the same time history makesMET him , it does not answerMET the larger question of how a multiplicity of the products of individual acts , ‘ totalizations ’ , can themselves be totalizedNONMET into the overall totalization requiredNONMET by the logic of dialectical rationality — rather than being the arbitrary , blind and self-cancelling movements of , sayMET , Hardy's immanent will .
Sartre's fundamental thesis , that ‘ History continually effects totalisations of totalisations ’ ( I , 15 ) , does not in itself answerMET what Ronald Aronson has rightly characterizedNONMET as the question for Sartre : ‘ how do separateMET , antagonistic actions yieldMET a history ; how do individual totalizations leadMET to Totalization ( and also progress , the direction of history , its truth and its meaning ) ?
’ For the whole basis of Sartre's argument is that the dialectic of history is not a metaphysical law , ‘ some powerful unitary force revealingMET itself behind History like the will of God ’ , but the continuously producedMET effect of individual conflicts ; each action is in its turn subsumed as a part of the whole in an ever broader , developing totalization ( I , 37 ) .
What Sartre needsNONMET to demonstrateNONMET , therefore , is that if the law of the dialectic worksMET from the individual level , overall it producesMET nothing less than the intelligibility or the meaning of History as such : The dialectic is the law of totalization which createsNONMET several collectivities , several societies , and one history — realities , that is , which imposeMET themselves on individuals ; but at the same time it must be wovenMET out of millions of individual actions .
We must showMET that it is possible for it to be both a resultant … and a totalizing force … how it can continually bring about the unity of dispersive profusion and integration .
( I , 36 ) But what producesMET the overall direction of History ?
How does it ‘ continually bring about the unity of dispersive profusion and integration ’ ?
Sartre does not attemptNONMET to answerNONMET this question , shiftingMET rather to the notion of a lack of self-consciousness .
The dialectic is the law that remainsNONMET hidden .
At the moment , ‘ history is madeMET without being knownNONMET ( l'histoire se fait sans se connâitre ) ’ — history constitutesNONMET , we might sayNONMET today , a political unconscious .
‘ Marxism ’ , on the other hand , Sartre claims , ‘ is History itself becomingNONMET conscious of itself ’ ( I , 40 ) : as for Lukács , it is by becomingNONMET conscious of itself as the subject of history that the working class will understandMET history's meaning — and so recognizeMET itself as the meaning of history .
While he suggestsMET in apocalyptic tones in The Problem of Method that this process of self-consciousness is at last beginningNONMET to takeMET place , and that civil , foreign and colonial wars are becomingNONMET apparent as different forms of a single class struggle , Sartre also admitsMET that the divorce between theory and praxis which ensuedNONMET under Stalinism has generally preventedNONMET any clear self-consciousness among the masses .
The ‘ detour , of Stalinism is thus formalizedNONMET as Marxism's own descent into its unconscious , resultingNONMET in a dream-work of heterogeneous histories that have eludedMET systematization and subsumption into the single meaning of Marxism's own reading of history .
It is therefore , Sartre arguesNONMET , our historical task to makeMET it known , promotingNONMET not just the historical process as such , but also the general recognition whereby the plurality of the meanings of individual histories can be seenMET to combineMET to makeMET one history , with one meaning — the ‘ Truth of humanity ’ ( I , 822 ) .
Sartre's account thus setsMET up the articulation of history , univocal meaning , and totality as the indissoluble set of elements requiredNONMET for the validation of Marxism , necessary in order to saveMET it from its detour from itself .
The problem , however , remainsMET how such universals are producedMET from the multiplicity of initiatingMET individual praxes .
If History is a history of conflict , how could it be both one and internally diversifiedNONMET without the inner moving principle of the dialectic ?
How can History be a unity if it is also conflictual , if each action is aimedMET at destroyingMET the other and results in a double negation in which the original aims of each action have been destroyedMET by the other ?
If each action negatesNONMET the aim of the other , where is the ‘ unity ’ totalizedNONMET in the conflict ?
How does History constantly totalizeNONMET itself ?
( I , 817 — 18 ) Sartre arrivesMET at what he callsNONMET ‘ the real problem of History ’ , that is how there can be totalization without a totalizer , only at the very end of Volume I. It is not until the next volume , however , that he intendsNONMET to showMET how individual actions , separate multiplicities , makeMET up ‘ one human history , with one truth and one intelligibility ’ ( I , 69 ) .
Throughout , Sartre has nevertheless takenMET it ‘ for grantedNONMET that such a totalisation is constantly developingNONMET both as History and as historical Truth ’ ( I , 822 ) .
His History , therefore , is always in process : but its teleology of a final totalization always has to be assumedMET .
He thus assertsNONMET the Truth of History while constantly projecting forwards and deferringNONMET its proof .
But when the proof comesMET it also turnsMET out to restMET on the assumption that it is already true .
III THE SECOND CRITIQUE : ‘ We are tryingNONMET to establishNONMET the Truth of History' Sartre producesMET a persuasive formulation of the relation of the individual to the determining historical circumstance through his concepts of praxis and the practico- inert ; it is also obvious to him how the larger question of History ought to be solvedNONMET .
He assertsNONMET it often enough : ‘ History continually effects totalisations of totalisations , ( I , 15 ) .
But in Volume I of the Critique , as we have seenMET , he continually defersNONMET the demonstration of his proof .
For the ‘ dogmatic dialectic ’ , as he describesNONMET dialectical materialism , the whole question naturally poses no problem , for each person or group simply constitutes a partial moment of an already operative movement of totalization that producesMET them and then goesMET beyond them .
But Sartre's dispensing with all historicist schemas createsNONMET the problem of how , between two autonomous and contradictory totalizations , there could be ‘ one dialectical intelligibility of the ongoing process ’ ( II , 13 ) .
He attemptsNONMET to solveNONMET this through matchingMET his account of contradiction with a new concept derivedMET from the conjunction of work and labour : ‘ anti-labour ’ ( anti-travail ) , a category of negation .
The products of a conflict , as well as its residues , may seemNONMET incomprehensible insofar as they differNONMET from the original intentions of any of the combatants .
Nevertheless they constituteNONMET the basis and conditions for further actions and history .
Dialectical reason encountersMET such products as undecidablesNONMET : aporias — because they seemNONMET to be at once the results of a communal enterprise while at the same time bearingMET witness to the fact that this enterprise never existed except as the inhuman reverse side of two opposed actions in which each aimsMET to destroyMET the other .
In the dialectical perspective , we encounterMET these objects as productions which are human and providedNONMET with a future … thus they seemNONMET by themselves to be totalizations in process .
( II , 20 ) This meansMET that first , they leadMET to unforseeable results , and second , that the internal structure of social objects containsMET ‘ the double negation of themselves and of each constituent part by the other ’ ( II , 22 ) .
There is , therefore , before any understanding of historic agents and movements , a certain aporia in all social ensembles : from afar they may appearMET whole , but close to , they can be seenMET as riddled with holes .
This increasingly comesMET to resembleNONMET nothing so much as Sartre's own account of History .
In the context of the negativity of this formulation , Sartre is obliged to poseNONMET once again the problem of whether there can be a totalization , without any independent totalizer or totalizing force such as the dialectic , or whether the structure of negation that he has describedNONMET meansMET that , as for Adorno or Bakhtin , history does not developNONMET positively but , rather , negatively , and is therefore instead detotalizingNONMET : Marxism is rigorously true if History is totalization ; it is not so any more if human history decomposesMET into a plurality of particular histories , or if , in any case , within the relationship of immanence that characterizesNONMET struggle , the negation of each adversary by the other is on principle detotalizing .
Certainly , we have neither the design nor the actual possibility of showingMET here the full truth of dialectical materialism … Our goal is solely to establishNONMET whether , in a practical ensemble tornMET apart by antagonism ( whether there are multiple conflicts or whether they are reducedMET to one ) the breaks themselves are totalizingNONMET and carriedMET along by the totalizing movement of the ensemble .
( II , 25 ) At this point Sartre confrontsMET the possibility that the whole project of the Critique , stated so confidently on its very first page — ‘ it must be provedNONMET that a negation of a negation can be an affirmation ’ ( I , 15 ) — may breakMET down .
perhaps the Truth of History can not be provedNONMET ; its direction can not be discernedMET .
Sartre's reaction to the threat that the negation of a negation may produceMET a detotalizing effect is to introduceMET a new category , a unifying force of a ‘ singularization ’ which incarnatesMET the universal : ‘ If totalization really is an ongoing process ’ , he writesNONMET , ‘ then it operatesMET everywhere .
That meansNONMET both that there is a dialectical meaning of the practical ensemble … and that each singular event totalizesNONMET in itself the practical ensemble in the infinite richness of its singularity ’ ( II , 26 ) .
Unlike Lukács ' insignificant event from which the universal is precariously drawnMET out through the narrative , Sartre's singularity worksMET synecdochally in a conventional antinomy with the universal , the relation between the two structured according to the familiar nineteenth-century model of organic growth or process in which each singular event makesMET up the whole while , as he putsMET it , ‘ the whole is entirely present in the part as its present meaning and as its destiny ’ .
Sartre's ‘ singular universal ’ , therefore , begsMET the question , for it is predicatedNONMET on the assumption that , if there is not a totality as such , then there already is an overall totalization : ‘ If totalization really is an ongoing process … ’ .
That developing process is itself totalizedNONMET through Sartre's assertion that each totalization is the totalization of all struggles , as it must be if the singular is to incarnateMET the universal .
The concept of the singular universal thus facilitatesNONMET a circularity in the argument whereby Sartre can avoidMET the question which he beganNONMET by posingNONMET .
So the singular universal presumesMET the totalization he can't ( yet ) proveNONMET .
This strategy marksMET a structure of repetition in Sartre's text : each time he posesNONMET the question of how there can be totalization of History without a totalizer , he retreatsMET to a more limited example whose unity is already evident , but which in the end only bringsMET him back to the original question again .
In this case Sartre demonstratesMET how the singular universal works , by appealing to the concrete example of a boxing match — a random exemplification that just happensNONMET to reproduceMET the single adversaries of the master/slave dialectic .
Its totalization takesMET place through its incarnation , as part of the totality of boxing , in the overall framework within which each individual fight occursNONMET .
Each boxing match , Sartre claims , must be both a unique event and also in some sense the incarnation of all boxing , whose rules and conventions it followsMET , and whose past and future history it setsMET itself against .
But it is also apparent that that totality is not completely knownNONMET , nor is its future shape even presumedNONMET .
By totalization , therefore , Sartre does not here meanNONMET anything like a predetermined end or final closure of a totality but rather a process of mediation among the parts , where each is determinedNONMET by the other .
No one can predictNONMET the future of boxing , either at the level of particular victories or defeats , in effect a structure of repetition , nor at the more general level of possible modifications or developments of the sport .
Yet each individual bout articulatesMET itself within the framework of the history of boxing , known and unknown .
This allowsMET Sartre to includeMET chance and contingency in his scheme .
Since it can not be knownNONMET as a concept that will realizeMET itself in the future , Sartre arguesNONMET instead that the totality only producesMET itself in the moment : ‘ The incarnation as such is at once unrealizable except as totalization of everything and irreducible to a pure abstract unity of that which it totalizesNONMET ’ ( II , 58 ) .
The universal , the totality , can only be knownNONMET through the singular .
But its future direction remainsNONMET unknown and indeterminate .
At the same time Sartre makesMET a larger , though less persuasive claim that the boxing-match also worksMET synecdochally and re-exteriorizesNONMET a more fundamental violence , namely the interiorized condition of scarcity that he considersMET to be the basis of conflict in general .
The boxing match ‘ is the public incarnation of all conflict ’ ( II , 32 ) , totalizingNONMET in its own struggle the whole of ‘ contemporary irreducibilities and fissures ’ ( II , 26 ) : thus one can and must sayNONMET … that each fight is the singularisation of all the circumstances of the social whole in movement and that by this singularisation , it incarnatesMET the enveloping totalization which the historical process is .
( II , 58 ) But then he addsNONMET , ‘ I have saidNONMET and I repeat that we have not yet provedNONMET that this enveloping totalization existsNONMET ’ .
So , although it is possible to conceiveMET of any event as an incarnation of the totality , insofar as it must itself makeMET up a part of that totality in its determination , unlike the case of the boxing match , where we can defineMET the overall entity ‘ boxing ’ , it still remainsNONMET unproven that an overall entity , ‘ History ’ , can be saidNONMET to existNONMET at all .
For all his use of the model of the boxing match , Sartre has really gotMET no further with the fundamental question of how there can be totalization without a totalizer .
It is simple enough for him to showMET that a boxing match takesMET place within a general totality of ‘ boxing ’ , which is itself only ever present in any individual incarnation , for as a game each match is both an individual bout and something conducted according to general rules and a specific social tradition .
But what about those conflicts that do not takeMET place within such a constituted social system , such as conflictual bourgeois societies which can not be saidNONMET to be unifiedNONMET , except , as Sartre suggestsMET dismissively , by appeal to a lost paradise before the class struggle ?
Such societies makeMET the conflicts of history irreducible to Sartre's logic unless , like the boxing match , they can be shownMET to takeMET part in a larger totalizable category .
However , when he posesNONMET the question of whether his method could workMET as well for the class struggle as for the boxing match , Sartre admitsMET that he findsMET it impossible to answerNONMET and returns instead to the much easier case of sub-groups .
Once again he backtracksMET and assumesMET a larger unity in which conflict takesMET place .
The major question thus always remainsNONMET unanswered in the Critique : every time that Sartre announcesMET that he is about to proceedMET with the fundamental problem of how History can be a totalization without a totalizer , he turnsMET back to a previous , more easily intelligible stage on the way .
His difficulty is accompaniedMET by a no doubt symptomatic increasing distrust of universals so that , in championingNONMET specificities against them , he seemsNONMET to give up the attempt to validateNONMET the universals — History as Totalization — that originally formed the object of his project .
At this point a further contradiction in Sartre's whole enterprise beginsNONMET to openMET up : for someone so deeply distrustful of universals it seemsNONMET curious that he has involvedNONMET himself so emphatically with the notions of totality , History , and the dialectic .
As Sartre insistsNONMET more and more upon the virtues of specificity ( II , 200 — 05 ) , such is his distaste for Marxist or any other universalizing categories that he refusesNONMET even to countenanceNONMET them , attemptingNONMET to replaceMET concepts with specificities , universals with singulars .
His scepticism goesMET to the extent of even denyingNONMET the existence of ‘ society ’ or ‘ the nation ’ as such ( II , 24 , 61 ) — the very totalities which his own general argument for totalization requiresNONMET .
Here certain similarities with later ‘ post-Marxist ’ theorists such as Foucault or Lyotard , beginNONMET to becomeNONMET apparent .
But if Sartre anticipatesNONMET such later thinkers we should not assumeMET too quickly that they have simply takenMET his insights further .
For Sartre's singular universal could never be expectedNONMET to solveNONMET the formal theoretical problem of how individual existential existence can be relatedNONMET to History insofar as it simply renamesNONMET , in one oxymoronic category , the original antithetical terms .
Without an adequate theory of their articulation , they simply beginNONMET to separateMET again .
( d ) Warfare and crusades The poet Marbod of Rennes celebratedMET ( in Latin ) the vengeance which would befallNONMET a wicked castellan and his troops : The poem highlightsMET two important twelfth-century developments : the use of force in punishing aristocratic crime ( the fruit of princely peace-keeping ) , and the increasing significance of siege-engines in warfare .
Intellectuals claimedNONMET a formative influence in the second too : John of Marmoutier declaredNONMET that monks from his own monastery had readNONMET Vegetius ' De Re Militari to Geoffrey le Bel when he was investingNONMET the castle of a rebellious castellan , and ascribed his success to their advice on firebombs .
But common sense may have been more important than learning in perceivingNONMET the vulnerability of most castles to — battering-rams and catapults ; for even in 1100 they were , as a rule , primitive structures .
Siege-engines demanded on the one hand skilled operators , and on the other a plentiful supply of unskilled labourers to moveNONMET the necessary materials .
This effectively restrictedMET their use to the wealthy and to those whose claim to assistance under the ban was incontrovertible .
Equally , the improvements in fortification neededNONMET to withstandNONMET their effects — thick stone walls , inner as well as outer defences — required incomes greater than those of simple lords .
The net effect was that , given dedication , princes — Louis VI , Geoffrey le Bel , Alphonse-Jourdain — could subdueNONMET rebellious castellans within their own demesnes , and could buildNONMET castles of their own which were impregnable to all but lengthy and sustained attack .
Henry II's castle at Chinon , where the treasury of Anjou was situatedNONMET , was the model for its generation , with its halls , upper chambers , tower , and curtain walling , set on a high point above a strategic crossing of the Loire .
It could be copiedMET only either by those of nearly equal wealth or by those who could concentrateNONMET their resources chiefly on defence — princes , great bishops or , in the south especially , towns .
All others becameNONMET vulnerable .
John of Salisbury's comment that not only the towns but also the fortresses of Gaul fearedMET Henry I of England was revealing of the new situation .
Similarly , campaigningNONMET in the field imposedNONMET an increasing financial burden .
The treaty between Robert II of Flanders and Henry I of England , renewedNONMET by their successors , stipulatedNONMET that each knight supplied to the English king should bringNONMET three horses with him — this at a time when a horse representedNONMET a major investment .
Then knightly armour grewMET more elaborate and costly throughout the century .
And though some knights might be suppliedNONMET free by feudal service , household ones had to be maintainedMET by their lords , mercenary ones needed pay , and those with money-fiefs constitutedNONMET a regular charge on the treasury .
Besides , away from their home base , knights were useless on their own .
In open battle and in the plundering expeditions that constitutedNONMET the normal form of aggressive warfare , they neededNONMET the backing of archers , both mounted and on foot , and of numerous infantrymen .
The usual source of supply was town militias — Suger mentionsNONMET those of Rheims , Châlons , Laon , Soissons , Orléans , Etampes , and Paris in the royal army of 1124 .
But they might have to be supplementedNONMET by mercenaries from Flanders and the Low Countries , where the rapidly expanding population forced large numbers of young men into military careers .
In the eyes of the faithful , these ‘ Brabanters ’ , with their freebooting and lack of discipline after the end of campaigns , were as dangerous as heretics ; in 1171 Frederick Barbarossa and Louis VII agreedNONMET to expelNONMET them from their lands .
Their value in battle , as shields behind which the knights could shelterMET before they launchedMET their charge , ensuredNONMET their continued employment by those who could affordNONMET them — notably Henry II of England .
But the hatred they arousedNONMET meant that they were liable to be brutally slaughteredNONMET if capturedNONMET afterwards .
Inevitably , therefore , war on the grand scale as foughtNONMET by princes boreMET little resemblance in practice to the feuds of lesser men .
The divergence was sharpenedMET by the application of a theoretical distinction , the fruit of Augustinian theology , amplified as the century wentNONMET on by canon and Roman law reference ; princes pronouncedNONMET their campaigns just wars ( foughtNONMET against aggressors with the aim of re-establishingNONMET peace ) or public wars ( declaredNONMET by a competent authority in the public interest ) , while they condemnedNONMET the wars of lesser men as infractions of the peace .
Geoffrey Martel had perceivedMET the propaganda potential of public war as early as the mid eleventh century ; later it enabledNONMET Henry the Liberal of Champagne to claimNONMET the military service of all lords within his county , a reapplication of the Carolingian ban .
So it could be a powerful weapon .
Yet the logic of the definition suggestedMET that it would benefitNONMET especially kings , whose competence to declareNONMET war could not be impugnedNONMET : thus Thibaud of Blois failedNONMET to persuadeNONMET the monks of Marmoutier that they owedNONMET him service when he foughtNONMET against Louis VI ; they claimedNONMET discretion in the matter ; and in 1184 , the mighty Philip of Alsace hesitatedNONMET to commitMET to battleNONMET the army he had summonedNONMET against Philip Augustus , through fear that its ranks might meltMET away .
The contrast with the united front Louis VI and his troops presented to the emperor Henry V in 1124 was marked .
A royal banner now bestowed respectability on a cause ; kings ' wars were assumedMET to be for the sake of peace , even when cripplingly expensive and increasingly savage .
This goesMET some way to explainingNONMET why the complicated campaigns within Toulouse in the second half of the century were largely fought out under the banners of the Angevin , Aragonese , and French kings ; and why the revolts of Henry II's sons had widespread ramifications .
The twelfth century was characterizedNONMET , therefore , by fewer but more protracted wars , which smoulderedMET for long periods between short , sharp bouts of conflict , like the war that coveredMET must of the reigns of Henry I of England and Louis VI of France , the one inauguratedMET by the great rebellion of 1173 , which outlivedMET both Louis VII and Henry II , or that against Catalan claims in the south .
Into these large numbers of local conflicts were subsumedNONMET .
The pattern caused problems , in that the circumstances which might triggerNONMET off renewed fighting were unpredictable ; yet the moment an opportunity offered , princes had to be preparedNONMET for invadingNONMET their enemies ; there was no time for lengthy preparation .
The usual tactic was to marchNONMET troops across the enemy's territory , plunderingNONMET and looting ; to takeMET fortified places if the task was easy ; to obtainNONMET allies among the lords of the locality ; and to retreatNONMET without fightingNONMET a battle if at all possible — in effect an application to a wider canvas of the some technique of warfare which had earlier madeMET castellans formidable in the immediate environs of their castles .
It necessitatedNONMET the rapid mobilization of auxiliaries to joinMET a core of highly-trained troops kept constantly , at the ready — the princes ' military households , which becameNONMET the linch pin of the system .
John of Marmoutier's life of Geoffrey le Bel offersMET a glimpse of how strong bonds were createdNONMET between the prince and his followers within the household , and how a high level of training was maintainedMET at all times .
Geoffrey was broughtNONMET up from infancy with the sons of neighbouring Angevin lords , on whose companionship he reliedNONMET .
When it cameMET time for him to be knightedNONMET by Henry I in Rouen , he setNONMET off for Normandy with a crowd of these young men about him .
In Rouen , the occasion was celebratedNONMET with pomp , elaborate dress , and a great feast , and then the youths all demonstratedNONMET their military skill at a grand tournament , at which Geoffrey naturally won the highest honours .
It was within this kind of environment that chivalry flourishedMET , that young men learned to identifyNONMET , their vassalage towards their lord as a symbol of their honour , that they debatedMET the relative merits of Roland's and Oliver's way of displayingMET loyalty ; and that they learnedNONMET the finer points of jousting .
Tournaments were disapprovedNONMET of by ecclesiastics , for they could be both bloody and dangerous .
Yet they suppliedNONMET real needs : .
that of an instruction in the martial arts compatible with the maintenance of a prince's peace ; that of an outlet for competitive instincts within the claustrophobic confines of a court ; and that of display to maintainMET princely social status .
So they flourishedMET everywhere .
They offeredMET opportunities for men of skill to acquireNONMET great position in the world — Arnoul of Ardres caughtMET the eye of Countess Ida of Boulogne through his exploits ; and they also conferredNONMET lustre on the great — Geoffrey le Bel and Philip of Alsace were renowed throughout France for their distinguished performances in these show battles .
All this formed a background to the first century of crusading ; and it goesMET some way to explainingNONMET the more secular aspects of the magnetism which drewMET French knights to takeMET up the cross in their thousands .
Urban II , launchingMET the First Crusade at Clermont in 1095 , presentedMET it as a natural evolution of the peace movement : warriors were to forgetNONMET their petty feuds and squabbles in a campaign to promoteMET the interests of Holy Church .
The war , declaredNONMET by one whose moral authority was unimpeachable , was to freeMET the Eastern churches , to endNONMET Muslim guardianship of the holy places , to restoreMET Jerusalem to its proper state .
As princes sawMET it , it was a just war in the fullest sense of the term ; those who were slaughteredNONMET in its battles were regardedMET as among the martyrs of the church .
When Raymond of Toulouse , Robert II of Flanders , Robert Curthose , Stephen of Blois , and Hugh of Vermandois respondedMET to the call , past and present members of their military households fellMET almost automatically into rank behind them , to testNONMET themselves against terrible dangers , but also to enjoyNONMET the companionship in arms , the adventure , the deeds of daring which were the stuff of the chansons de geste .
That they sharedMET , along with all other participants in the crusade , a fervent devotion , a conviction that their sins would be forgivenNONMET , is certain .
Yet for them crusading necessitated no large leap of the imagination , no millenarian vision ; it was simply a challenging and a deserving extension of their everyday activities .
In French eyes , the hero of the First Crusade was Robert II of Flanders .
While Raymond of Toulouse remainedNONMET in Outremer , Stephen and Hugh disgracedNONMET themselves in escapingNONMET from the siege of Antioch , and Robert Curthose , no matter how gallant , at least in his lifetime failed to impressMET , Robert II's prestige soaredMET to the skies .
He becameNONMET Robert of Jerusalem to his contemporaries ; his deeds were recordedNONMET in the Song of Antioch ; his pious bravery totally expungedMET the memory of Robert the Frisian's usurpation ; and after his death his son Baldwin VII harpedMET on his father's achievement to justifyNONMET his substantial use of coercion against the enemies of the church .
Outside Flanders , Robert's sister's marriage to Roger of Sicily was a mark of his new position in the world ; like Louis VI's sister's marriage to Bohemond of Antioch , it stretchedMET French kinship connections into the new Norman colonies , ensuringNONMET that travellers from the homeland would findMET a welcome in those distant parts .
Robert's example was a potent one .
After the next change in dynasty , Thierry and Philip of Alsace strengthenedMET their shaky claim to the comital position by attainingNONMET for themselves the prestige attachedMET to being the outstanding crusaders of their generation .
Thierry's remote connection with the family of Godfrey de Bouillon , along with his marriage with Sybilla of Anjou , Fulk V's daughter , gaveMET him some claim to the throne of Jerusalem ; as a consequence , the aristocracy of Outremer viewedMET him and Philip with mixed feelings , expectingNONMET much of them , yet fearingNONMET their ambitions .
In the end , it was not in Outremer but in the newly conquered Byzantine empire that the Flemish crusading achievement was crownedMET with the elevation of Count Baldwin IX to the imperial throne in 1204 .
But in the twelfth century , the house of Alsace could affordNONMET the high costs of their expeditions — Thierry wentNONMET to Jerusalem four times , Philip twice — and the counts ' repeated absences in fact promotedMET administrative reform ; the baillis and the Grote Bref were as much the products of crusading as the English and Norman judicial system and exchequers were the product of the king-duke's divided attentions .
But if , on balance , the Flemish counts benefited materially from crusadingNONMET , — as , arguably , did the Angevin — they were far from typical .
For other French houses a commitment to Outremer often represented a sacrifice of domestic political interest .
The achievements of Raymond IV St Gilles in consolidatingNONMET his authority within Toulouse were threatenedMET by his departure in 1095 , especially since it was knownNONMET that he had no intention of returningNONMET home .
Then his example luredMET his elder son Bertrand to Tripoli in 1112 , and his younger son Alphonse Jourdain there in 1147 .
Had not his grandson Raymond V fulfilledNONMET his crusading obligation in his early youth , thereby freeingMET himself from the necessity of interruptingNONMET his career in the county , the principality of Toulouse might have disintegratedMET altogether .
William IX's crusade of 1101 broughtNONMET about serious financial problems in Aquitaine which causedNONMET rapid devaluation in the hitherto stable currency ; and Robert Curthose's decision to mortgage Normandy to William Rufus in order to coverMET his crusading expenses exacerbatedNONMET a conflict over the duchy which was not settledMET until the death of his son William Clito in 1128 .
All in all , it was not surprising that Suger , mulling over the precedents of early crusading , triedMET to dissuadeNONMET Louis VII from embarkingMET on his Jerusalem journey in 1145 .
Yet the appeal of crusading was , if anything , even stronger to those aristocratic houses just below the level of the princely : it was , after all , the house of Boulogne which producedMET the first two rulers of Jerusalem .
The counts of Nevers , the lords of Montpellier , the lords of Amboise and Lusignan , the Trencavels , were fervent devotees of the ideal ; so the problems of absences , shipwrecks , death abroad plaguedNONMET them as much as their princes .
On occasion , their determination to sacrificeMET for Christ playedMET directly into their overlord's hands , as when the count of La Marche , who had no direct heir , soldNONMET his county to King Henry II in 1177 .
When it did not , accompanyingNONMET their princes in a joint crusading venture , as the lord of Amboise accompaniedNONMET Fulk V or Hugh VI de Lusignan William IX , created new personal links .
The political spin-offs from crusadingNONMET are therefore more difficult to calculateMET than at first glance they might appearMET .
Nevertheless it is clear that the chief gainer was Louis VII .
The irony of this layMET in the fact that the Second Crusade was counter-productive in Outremer , embittered relations with Byzantium , and resulted in the deaths of enormous numbers of its participants , particularly those drawnMET from the non­aristocratic classes .
Yet it consolidatedNONMET the king's position within France , partly through the skilled regency of Suger , but also because , in takingNONMET on himself the leadership of the expedition , Louis re-NONMET emergedMET as a credible ruler of men .
His noble gesture appeasedNONMET those churchmen who had been appalled by his early obstinacy over the archbishopric of Bourges .
The disasters that befellNONMET his army paradoxically heightened his personal charisma : even the barons of Outremer continuedNONMET to lookMET on him as their one potential saviour .
His friendship with Raymond V of Toulouse , a fellow warrior , reversedMET the trend of history since the middle of the tenth century , in bringingMET the princes of the far south back into the king's mouvance .
The crowds of Burgundians who accompaniedNONMET the king learned to respectNONMET him ; on their return , they soughtNONMET the arbitration of the royal court in their disputes , and they welcomedNONMET Louis's intervention within the counties that fringedNONMET the duchy of Burgundy .
As William of St Denis putMET it , Even as early as 1147 it was apparent that the crusading movement had providedNONMET a new sense of aristocratic cohesion in the realm .
The great joint expeditions , the combined leaderships , although not without friction , had been justifiedNONMET by their outstanding achievement , the conquest and maintenance of Jerusalem .
They were the Gesta Francorum , the deeds of the Franks , or the Gesta Dei per Francos , God's deeds performed through the Franks , as two of their earliest chroniclers entitledNONMET them .
But what was missingMET before 1147 was a clear sense of who the Franks were .
The Second Crusade , however , was launchedMET with St Bernard's ringing appeal to the count and barons of Brittany : In takingMET his place at the head of the Second Crusade , the Rex Francorum decisively hastened the transformation of the Franks into the French .
5 The Philosopher's Child Judith Hughes SOME OF OUR CHILDREN ARE MISSING Children have servedMET philosophy very well .
That is the first thing which anyone surveyingMET the literature would noticeNONMET .
Along with a selection from a list including women , animals , madmen , foreigners , slaves , patients and imbeciles , children have servedMET in that great class of beings , the ‘ not-men ’ , in contrast with which male philosophers have definedMET and valuedMET themselves .
Unlike the others who appearMET and disappearMET as fashion and progress dictateMET , children occupyMET a permanent place in the list partly because of their continuing presence as a potential sub , partly because they have never protestedNONMET and mainly because it is assumedNONMET that in favourable circumstances they will becomeNONMET men and therefore requireNONMET attention .
They have receivedNONMET it in the shape of detailed educational theory carefully worked out to seeMET them through the maturation process from infancy to adulthood .
Generations of philosophers have documentedNONMET this process .
Perhaps the best known version is Shakespeare's seven ages of man which is a poetic statement of what had already been receivedNONMET wisdom for centuries and was to remainNONMET so for centuries to comeMET .
Education was to guideMET the infant through the transition to manhood including such stages as childhood , boyhood and youth .
That is the second thing to noticeNONMET ; the philosopher's children are boys .
The fact that at least half of the world's children would not actually goMET through this process beyond the first two stages is conveniently forgottenNONMET or ignored and , no doubt , the reasons for this were largely social .
But the neglect of girl children through the centuries of theorising is more than a social injustice , though many might thinkNONMET this real and bad enough .
Education has an end .
Although it is fashionable to talkNONMET about its value ‘ for its own sake ’ , what promptsMET the theorising is the strong and well-founded belief that the experiences of childhood affect the kind of adult which the child turnsMET out to be .
Where the end is person- rather than role — that is , where the end is the development of the human mind and spirit rather than the production of , sayNONMET , information technologists — then education is valuedMET in relation to some conception of worthwhile human existence which it is meantNONMET to serveMET .
Such an ideal does not standMET isolated from the practices which striveMET towards it but interactsMET with those practices , helpsMET to constructMET them , and is in turn constructedMET by them .
The great philosophers have always producedMET such a person-oriented account at least for those whose education was thoughtNONMET to matterNONMET .
Education has been directedMET at the production of the rational , the free , the independent of mind , the dignified , in short , the autonomous human being .
Yet because the philosopher's adult has traditionally been male , his children boy children , and his educational programmes designedMET to facilitateNONMET the transition between them , the ideal of the fully human person has been masculinisedNONMET to the point where otherwise thoughtful and sometimes good and wise men have unashamedly admittedMET that this defining ideal is not applicable to half the species .
Rationality turnsNONMET into narrow intellectualism , freedom into licence , independence into isolationism , dignity into selfish pride ; the autonomous human being turnsMET out to be no more than a social atom after all .
The degeneration occursMET , not because men are congenitally or even incorrigibly narrow , libertine , isolated or selfish , but because in definingMET themselves as autonomous beings in opposition to other human beings they have had to seekNONMET what separatesMET them as a group from others .
It is a curiously paradoxical foundation upon upon which to buildMET a theory of autonomy .
Moral autonomy is concerned with individuals not with groups ; a conception of autonomy which dependsNONMET upon group membership displaysMET its own contradiction .
This paper is partly about the rejection of certain accounts of autonomy though not with the rejection of the ideal of autonomy itself .
It is also about children .
WOMEN PHILOSOPHERS AND GIRL CHILDREN Why should women in general and women philosophers in particular be specially interested in the nature and status of children ?
There are , of course , the familiar and obvious reasons connectedMET with women's traditional role in child-rearing but there are less obvious reasons too .
When philosophers dismissMET women as ‘ not-men ’ they frequently do more than simply lumpNONMET them together with children or lunatics .
Explicitly or implicitly the suggestion is that women are children or lunatics or whichever other company they keepMET .
It would be well to knowNONMET just what this entailsMET .
Schopenhauer saidMET that women remainNONMET big children all their lives ; it would be interesting to knowNONMET what he thoughtNONMET children were like .
A common result of this is that when the philosophers denyNONMET autonomy to women , they do so for the same sorts of reason that they denyNONMET it to children and citeNONMET lack of rationality , capriciousness and vulnerability among their characteristics .
We can do more than to rejectNONMET such descriptions of ourselves ; we can askNONMET further questions : are children like this ?
is this why children are not autonomous ?
Again , women well knowNONMET what it is like to be treated as children and they findMET it offensive .
It would therefore be reasonable to considerMET whether children findMET it offensive to be treated like children .
Is being treated as a child an intrinsically humiliating and self-denying experience ?
What is it to be treated as a child ?
Women philosophers are in a special position to considerMET such questions for in the image of the philosopher's child they seeMET themselves .
It is no accident that the liberation of women , such as it is , should formMET part of a wider movement of liberation in general ; liberation for one part of the ‘ not-men ’ is boundMET to have a knock-on effect when your fellow groups are sometimes quite literally identifiedNONMET with you .
The assumption that all groups in the ‘ not-men ’ class are identical with each other is so firmly rooted that , as we shall seeMET in the fourth section , it is readily assumed even by modern libertarian thinkers that showingMET that , for example , some ground for distinguishingMET between men and women is false or irrelevant , immediately commitsMET us to the view that the same ground is irrelevant in distinguishing men from children .
‘ That's what they used to sayMET about women ’ is not a proof that sayingMET it about a child is false .
But it should makeMET us very suspicious .
That when women are givenMET the vote it followsMET that children should be givenMET it too is no argument at all , but a version of it occursMET in modern debates over the justice or injustice of Mill's famous disclaimer in his essay On Liberty .
Having deniedNONMET that we may ever legitimately interfereNONMET with the liberty of another except on the grounds of self-protection , Mill ( 1910 ) assertsMET : this principle is meantNONMET to applyMET only to human beings in the maturity of their faculties .
We are not speakingMET of children or of young persons below the age which the law may fixMET as that of manhood or womanhood .
Those who are still in a state to requireNONMET being takenMET care of by others must be protectedNONMET against their own actions as well as against external injury .
( p.73 ) This view , as we shall seeMET , has been attackedMET on the grounds that it restsMET on the false assumption that the distinction between adults and children is identical with the distinction between rational and non-rational beings .
The attacks are basedMET on empirical observation ; most women and older children are actually quite as rational as most men while some men are actually less rational .
If we agreeNONMET that in that case women should be embracedMET by the liberty principle then so should children .
I shall suggestNONMET that this does not followMET because rationality is not in fact the grounds for the distinction in the first place .
Partly to redressNONMET the balance and partly because talkingMET about ‘ children ’ coversMET such a wide range of potential images , I shall tryNONMET to keepMET before my mind an ordinary 10-year-old of our society .
She is the child of this paper unless I indicateMET otherwise .
Throughout we should askNONMET ourselves , does this ( whatever is being saidMET ) applyMET to her ?
First of all , letNONMET us remindNONMET ourselves of the traditional picture of children drawnMET for us by some great philosophers of the past .
One thing they are all quite sure about is that children are not like adults ; in particular they agreeNONMET that children lackNONMET some capacity for rational thought which adults have .
NOW WE ARE 6 — OR 10 — OR 18 … .
the slave has absolutely no deliberative faculty ; the woman has but its authority is imperfect ; so has the child , but in this case it is immature .
( Aristotle , 1959,1260A ) Children … are not enduedMET with Reason at all , till they have attainedNONMET the use of speech but are calledMET Reasonable Creatures for the possibility apparent of having the use of Reason in time to comeMET .
( Hobbes , 1914 , p. 21 ) [ Children ] … love to be treated as Rational Creatures sooner than is imagined … [ by which ] … I meanNONMET , that you should makeMET them sensible by the Mildness of your carriage , and the composure even in your correction of them , that what you do is reasonable in you and useful and necessary for them .
( Locke , 1968 , p. 181 ) In training for youth , the child must be given reasons ; in the training of the infant for childhood this can not be done .
Young children ought merely to have things shownMET to them as they are , or they getNONMET puzzled and askNONMET question after question .
But as we approachMET the age of youth reason appearsMET .
At what age ought the education for youth to beginMET ?
Roughly at the age of ten years , when by nature the child entersMET the stage of youth and beginsNONMET to reflectMET … The youth … is capable of having principles ; his religious and moral ideas can be cultivatedMET , and he is able to attendNONMET to his own refinement .
( Kant , 1930 , pp. 250–1 ) If a society letsMET any considerable number of its members grow up mere children , incapable of being actedNONMET on by rational consideration of distant motives , society has itself to blameMET for the consequences .
( Mill , 1910 , p. 139 ) What are the philosophers ' children likeNONMET ?
They have an ‘ immature ’ deliberative faculty ( Aristotle ) , are not ‘ enduedMET with Reason ’ ( Hobbes ) , until roughly the age of 10 ( Kant ) and are ‘ incapable of being actedMET upon by rational consideration of distant motives ’ ( Mill ) .
But they are not completely lost causes .
The immature deliberative faculty will matureMET ; children have the ‘ possibility apparent ’ of turning into rational beings ( Hobbes ) ; they loveNONMET to be reated as though they were rational though they are not so yet ( Locke ) ; you can giveMET the prerational child reasons for actingNONMET in certain ways and he will turnNONMET into the youth who is capable of having principles ( Kant ) .
Until the time when these things happenNONMET then Mill's disclaimer comesMET into operation .
Children must be takenMET care of by others and protected from external injury and against their own actions .
The traditional view is encapsulatedMET in the claim that children are not autonomous ; that is , on a standard interpretation , they lackNONMET the capacity to actNONMET rationally in pursuit of their own self-chosen goals .
It is then a matter of preference whether you sayMET that they can not chooseNONMET the goals or that they can not formMET strategies to achieveNONMET them or both .
In either case , the political implication is that denyingNONMET rights to children is entirely justified , and there the matter rests .
In all this , there are perhaps a couple of things which lookMET plausible when we compareNONMET the philosopher's child with our mental picture ; Aristotle's observation that children are immature and Mill's suggestion that they might needNONMET protection .
Beyond that , the similarities seemNONMET remote .
There is obviously something wrong with a portrayal of children as totally lackingNONMET in reason until they leapNONMET out of bed on their tenth birthday announcingNONMET that they are now able to actNONMET on principle .
Apart from being false , such an account leavesMET no room in our thinking about children for things like teaching and learning , or development in understanding and character and all those other concepts which referMET to processes and not to states .
The tension between these theoretical views of children as non-rational , non- autonomous beings and the practical knowledge of real children is evident in those quotations from Hobbes and Locke and Kant and Mill .
Children , according to Hobbes , have the ‘ possibility apparent ’ of becomingNONMET reasonable .
In what does the possibility consistNONMET ?
Hobbes is not usingNONMET an inductive argument here ; the ‘ possibility apparent ’ is not an inductive argument from observations about past children but is meantNONMET to referMET to some discernible feature of present ones .
But what ?
Hobbes does not tellMET us , but whatever it is it had better be something which a monkey does not have .
It is not language since Hobbes is here talkingMET about the prelinguistic child .
Perhaps it consistsNONMET in the ability to respondMET intelligently to the language of others .
But then , either Hobbes has failedNONMET to distinguishMET the child from at least the higher and domesticated animals or the force of ‘ intelligently ’ must be explainedNONMET in such a way as to excludeMET animals .
In any case , if such a qualification is calledMET for it is hard to seeMET how a creature with no rationality at all could possessMET it .
Locke's remarks are just as puzzling .
Children are definitely not rational but loveNONMET to be treated as if they were .
How is this possible ?
Apparently they likeNONMET having things explainedNONMET to them without understanding either the explanation or even what an explanation is .
Perhaps he just meansNONMET that they likeNONMET the sound of my voice ?
Well , maybe they do , but makingNONMET any old noises is clearly not sufficient to enterMET the rationality stakes ; I must at least sayMET something .
Is it just that I talkNONMET to them that they loveNONMET ?
Maybe , but I can also , if I likeNONMET , talk to my car , but yellingNONMET at it in the approved Basil Fawlty manner is hardly treating it as rational .
Lockean children have the added amazing ability to recogniseMET reason in you without possessingMET any themselves , while Kantian kids , two stages back from rationality , have the disconcerting habit of gettingNONMET puzzled and askingNONMET questions .
Mill's minors are a little more complicated .
Part of the time he seesMET them in the familiar way as creatures who lackNONMET rationality to at least some degree .
But in the disclaimer his children needNONMET above all to be protectedNONMET from the ghastly consequences of their own actions .
Their problem seemsNONMET to be not one of the inability to chooseMET goals or to formMET strategies for achievingNONMET them , but an incorrigible propensity to chooseMET the wrong ones and an awesome efficiency in achievingNONMET them unless adults interveneNONMET .
All in all , it is a pretty unconvincing picture .
If you sayMET that children are completely non-rational then you have to accountNONMET for the fact that they becomeNONMET rational , and to do that it appearsNONMET from these examples that you have to assumeNONMET that they already are .
If , on the other hand , you allowMET rationality to children , then you can not useNONMET their lack of it as a criterion to distinguishMET them from adults .
Hobbes et al .
are not aware of the unreality of their original pictures which is why , often in the same sentence , they produceMET these contradictions .
The one thing they do not do is to re-examineNONMET the original for the tell-tale signs of forgery .
ILLEGITIMATE INFERENCES The recognition that children can not simply be writtenMET off in the rationality stakes and can not therefore be denied autonomy on this account has ledMET some writers to concludeNONMET that they can not , therefore , be deniedNONMET it on any account .
We should noticeMET that this view is not just a flight of fancy from the loony left , the pederast lobby or children themselves .
It is also to be foundMET in stronger or weaker versions of more cautious academic thought .
In Escape from Childhood ( 1974 ) , John Holt notesMET that children are , in fact , capable of a great deal more than modern society allowsMET them to be .
He seesMET childhood as a fairly modern invention designed to fitMET adult rather than children's needs , and an oppressive invention at that .
He suggestsNONMET that children should be givenMET a comprehensive range of civil and legal rights including the right to voteNONMET , to manageNONMET their own financial affairs , to directMET and manageNONMET their own education and to controlMET their own sex lives and to makeMET and enterMET into , on a basis of mutual consent , quasifamilial relationships outside one's immediate family — i.e. the right to seekNONMET and chooseNONMET guardians other than one's own parents and to be legally dependent on them .
( Holt , 1974 , p. 16 ) This is also the view put forward by John Harris , though in less specific terms .
Like Holt , Harris believesNONMET that the so-called incompetence of children is an adult invention imposed on children for adults ' convenience .
He makesMET a firm proposal that the age of majority should be gradually reducedMET to 10 years , and  remarks : We must rememberNONMET that to denyNONMET someone control of their own lives is to offerNONMET them a most profound insult , not to mentionNONMET the which the frustration of their wishes and the setting at naught of their own plans for themselves will addMET .
Perhaps we should conductMET annual examinations from an early age to be sure that we do as little of this sort of damage as possible ?
( Harris , 1982 , p. 49 ) Now Holt and Harris both have many wise , enlightened and humane observations to makeMET about some of the injustices which we inflictNONMET upon children , but as these remarks show , puttingMET them right without inflictingNONMET equally grave injustice is no easy matter .
Both of them appearNONMET to sufferMET from a form of mental myopia in imaginingNONMET the consequences of such proposals , and I am not here referringMET only to Mill-type consequences of harm brought about by unwise decisions .
What , we may askNONMET Holt , happensNONMET to the child who , dissatisfied at home , seeksNONMET in vain for guardians who would suitMET him ?
What if no one wantsNONMET him ?
Our papers are currently full of ‘ hard ’ children in local authority care advertising for foster or adoptive parents .
In such a situation the skilled care of social workers is crucial to ensuringNONMET that an unwanted by-product of success for some children is not the total destruction of self-esteem for others .
What , we may askNONMET Harris , happensNONMET to the child who repeatedly failsNONMET his annual examination ?
To imposeNONMET such a test on children would be a particularly invidious way of discriminating against them , unless Harris has in mind that we should all undergoNONMET such examination .
He might then be open to bitter objections from many adults .
These two suggestions , far from being enlightened liberation of all children , are actually oppression of a deeply damaging kind to at least some , and Harris's suggestion containsMET a capacity criterion in disguise .
In any case , it would be dishonest to pretendNONMET that Mill-type consequences are not relevant here .
SupposeNONMET Holt's 6-year-old does optNONMET out of school ?
What happensNONMET to her then ?
What happensNONMET if her father is unwilling or unable to stayNONMET at home with her ?
Is it any better to obligeNONMET her to goNONMET abseiling or butterfly-catching instead ?
However much she may enjoyNONMET such pursuits , there will be times when she would actually rather wanderNONMET the streets unaccompanied .
Given that Holt is presumably not volunteeringNONMET himself to takeMET care of her , who will ?
His view that lettingNONMET children runNONMET in and out of busy airports smartly avoidingNONMET the traffic is perfectly reasonable dependsNONMET upon a conception of a child which is far narrower than even the sex divide .
Holt's child is actually the Artful Dodger ; mercifully , not all children are .
There are other difficulties too .
It is not clear whether or not Harris thinksNONMET that children of 10 should be obliged to take on full political status whether or not they wantNONMET to , but Holt clearly does not .
He proposesNONMET that ‘ the rights , privileges , duties , responsibilities of adult citizens be madeMET available to any young person , of whatever age , who wantsNONMET to makeMET use of them ’ ( Holt , 1974 , p. 15 ) .
If Holt thinksNONMET that this proposal would removeMET an arbitrary boundary line between adults and children , then he is mistaken .
The point about an adult citizen is that he has these rights , privileges , duties and responsibilities whether or not he wantsNONMET them .
He may not exerciseMET his rights or he may shirkNONMET his duties , but he can not forgoNONMET them .
They are not just available to him , they are his .
That is what being a citizen involvesMET .
Rights and privileges do not poseNONMET any particular problems in the case of children .
Holt can and does believeNONMET that children should have them as adults do , and then leavesMET it up to the child to decideNONMET whether or not to exerciseMET them .
But the same can not be saidMET for duties and responsibilities .
Failure to exerciseMET one's rights may be morally neutral ; failure to carry out one's duties is not .
It would be perfectly possible to giveMET the rights to children without imposingNONMET the duties on them , the one does not entailMET the other , but we would then still be distinguishing between adults and children as citizens .
Children still would not have full political status .
Duties and responsibilities are not merely available to a citizen ; they are an integral part of being a citizen .
Holt does not wantNONMET children to be obliged to take on any of these responsibilities and he managesMET to makeMET his point by concentratingMET solely on the rights so that he can remarkNONMET : I do not sayMET , either , that these rights and duties should be tiedMET into one package , that if a young person wantsNONMET to assumeNONMET any of them , he must assumeNONMET them all .
He should be able to pickMET and chooseNONMET .
( Holt , 1974 , p. 16 ) If he can ‘ pickMET and chooseNONMET ’ , I suggestNONMET , he is not a citizen , he does not have full political status and he is quite distinguishable on these grounds alone from the adults around him who do not have this option .
Holt and Harris both , in the end , faceMET the same problem .
They attackMET the status quo by pointingMET out that the reasons givenMET for denyingNONMET rights to children are bad reasons , and then explicitly or implicitly denyNONMET them duties for no reason at all .
Whatever else such a strategy may achieveMET , it certainly does not manageMET to produceMET a situation in which children are politically indistinguishable from adults and it restsMET on premises which , unless they can be defendedMET , gainMET nothing for any defence to the charge of arbitrariness .
WHEN IN DOUBT , GOMET BACK TO ARISTOTLE The trouble with all the views which we have lookedMET at is that they tieMET the notion of autonomy firmly and solely to that of knowledge interpreted in either a broad or narrow sense .
That it is firmly tiedMET must be correct ; the inhabitants of Brave New World are not autonomous precisely because they are denied access to relevant information .
Relevant knowledge is a precondition of autonomy but it is not synonymous with it .
Aristotle saidMET something very interesting in that extract from the Politics which I quotedNONMET earlier ; he saidMET that women have a deliberative faculty but that it lacksNONMET full authority .
What did he meanNONMET ?
Revival under Law , 1911–1914 Few contemporaries would have expectedNONMET Balfour's retirement to leadMET to a Unionist recovery .
The party was in a mutinous condition in November 1911 and there was no apparent successor who would have even half of Balfour's political gifts .
Nor was it clear that Balfour's departure was universally desiredNONMET : at the National Union Conference a few days later , Leo Maxse was booedNONMET off the platform , and constituency parties everywhere passed resolutions regrettingMET Balfour's decision .
A great many crocodile tears were shedMET , for , since Unionists had such an elevated view of the principle of leadership , they were unable to acceptNONMET that they had just drivenMET their own leader from office .
The shock causedNONMET by Balfour's going thus did something to steadyMET the party and it certainly producedMET a real determination to settleMET the affairs of the party with less friction than had been fashionable of late .
The main contenders for the leadership were Austen Chamberlain and Walter Long , representingNONMET the two different establishments of the Edwardian Unionist party — the opposite worlds of Birmingham and Wiltshire — but the situation was complicated by the intervention of two outsiders , Edward Carson and Andrew Bonar Law .
Two strong groups emergedMET behind Long and Chamberlain , about equal in numbers , but there were few backers for Carson or Law .
Carson thereupon fellMET out of the contest — or rather announced that he was not standingMET , for no official nominations had been madeMET .
The party officers and Whips were solidly behind Chamberlain , but Law drewMET off some of his support among tariff reformers and , urged on by Edward Goulding and Max Aitken , he refusedNONMET to withdrawMET unless his continued candidature would allowMET Long to winNONMET .
Against Chamberlain it was rememberedNONMET that he was a Liberal Unionist ( as was Lansdowne , who ledMET the Unionists in the Lords ) and that he had not been entirely loyal to Balfour since the referendum pledge .
Long was supportedMET by the bulk of the English county members but by few of the party's men of talent .
By the morning of Friday 10 November it was clear that neither Chamberlain nor Long would secureMET a majority and that some supporters of each of them would not contentedly followMET the other .
A party meeting was to be heldMET on the following Monday and the Whips were makingMET preparation for a vote to be takenMET .
Chamberlain providedNONMET the way out by suggestingNONMET to Balcarres that both he and Long should withdrawMET and so allowNONMET Law to be electedNONMET unanimously ; he also turnedMET down Balcarres's remarkable advice that he should allowNONMET Long to be electedNONMET since Long would makeMET such a mess of things that Chamberlain would be boundMET to succeedNONMET within the year .
FacedMET with Chamberlain's proposition , and without a majority of his own , Long had no option but to agreeNONMET .
Bonar Law , backedMET by fewer MPs than any of the other three contenders at the beginning of the week was now to be the unanimous choice .
Robert Sanders reportedNONMET the " election " meeting on 13 November with evident satisfaction : The Carlton meeting on Monday wentMET off quite admirably .
Harry Chaplin in the chair a very great success .
A good many men cameNONMET into the room by no means inclined to acquiesceNONMET in the proposed arrangement .
Walter Long proposed Bonar Law .
His speech was one of the best things I have heardNONMET .
Manly and rather touching .
The country gentleman at his best .
He spokeNONMET and evidently felt strongly of the degradation that it would have been to the parry to have electedNONMET a leader by secret ballot .
Austen followedMET .
When Austen satNONMET down Chaplin suggestedNONMET that he had better putMET the question at once and on gettingMET an affirmative shout did so .
A clever way of stifling discussion and few could have done it so well .
Motion carried unanimously .
Bonar Law then sent for … His speech struckMET me as the feeblest of the day .
He was evidently movedMET and nervous .
The meeting separatedMET in great content with the Conservative Party all round .
It was certainly creditable .
The urgency of the events followingMET Balfour's resignation was due to the need to findNONMET a new leader before the National Union Conference .
So within a few days of his grudging acceptance by his parliamentary colleagues , Law's leadership was ratifiedMET by the throng of party notables at Leeds ; here he receivedNONMET a reception more typical of what was to comeMET in the future .
In 1911 Law was knownNONMET — in so far as he was knownNONMET at all in the parliamentary party — as a spirited debater .
A. ) .
P. Taylor has notedMET that Law was trainedMET , if he was trainedMET for anything in his early career , to be a debater .
In Glasgow he had pickedMET up many of the skills that a more highly-born politician might have acquiredMET in the Oxford Union or at the Bar , but skills that were very different in appearance .
His concern was solely with effectiveness rather than style ; he rarely spokeNONMET with more than brief notes and leftMET it to the occasion to furnishMET the words .
( When he becameNONMET Chancellor of the Exchequer this practice caused consternation at the Treasury , when he usedNONMET only a page of notes to assistMET him in movingMET complicated resolutions on wartime finance ; he reliedNONMET successfully on his memory to provideNONMET details and figures .
) As an extempore speaker he was able to tailorNONMET his words to his audience's reactions and so conveyMET the impression of personal conversation even when addressingNONMET thousands .
In parliament he was wont to abandonMET an argument half-completed if he sensedNONMET that his point had been madeMET ; the speeches that appearMET in Hansard were touchedMET up by his staff , and his speeches in the country were givenNONMET to the press in advance .
In debate he was a formidable opponent , and one that Asquith was never able to masterNONMET , for all his forensic skills .
Again Law succeededNONMET by unorthodoxy ; he was quick to graspMET the essentials of an opponent's argument and quite prepared to be rude or direct if the situation demandedMET it .
In the long debates over Marconi in 1913 and over the Curragh " mutiny " in 1914 Law was able to nailMET Asquith's evasions where a more polished stylist might have been foiledNONMET .
Occasionally , in the onrush of pursuit , he gaveMET commitments that were later regretted , but these were a small price to payMET .
The Unionist recovery was builtMET around Law's leadership , but what Asquith calledNONMET the " new style " of obstruction , threats and offensive behaviour did not originateNONMET with Law .
The beginnings are to be foundMET in the diehard campaign against the Parliament Bill .
It was in June 1911 that the first scenes of disorder were mountedMET in the House of Commons , ledMET by Lord Hugh Cecil .
In August 1911 the diehard peers used language as violent as any that Law was to useNONMET later , and in the crucial decision on the House of Lords Law sided with the hedgers rather than the ditchers .
Ulster's opposition to Home Rule long pre-datedNONMET Law's leadership and he had rarely even spokenNONMET on Irish affairs in parliament before becomingNONMET leader .
Before he succeededNONMET Balfour then , Law was not associatedNONMET with any of the features that were to characterizeMET his party leadership ; his contribution was to useNONMET the leadership in the service of all of these causes , to makeMET himself the spokesman for the most spirited sections of the party .
Law conceived of the role of the leader in an exactly opposite sense from Balfour : he soughtMET to fosterMET unity by placingMET himself at the head of the discordant elements where Balfour had thrownMET the leadership on the side of restraint .
Their respective positions explainMET this in part : as ex-Prime Minister and a considerable figure in his own right , Balfour had the confidence to believeNONMET in his own judgement even when isolatedMET from the bulk of the party ; as the tertium quid in the recent contest , Law had neither the weight nor the confidence to takeMET such a detached view .
His strategy was rather to canalizeMET the enthusiasm of the diehards into party channels , to articulateMET their views , and to createNONMET unity from the sense of movement .
In his characteristic phrase , " I am their leader , I must followMET them " — but he determinedNONMET to followMET them from the front .
As a result of this he was labelledMET as a diehard and a bigot , when he actually distrustedNONMET the diehards and was himself distrustedNONMET by the bigots .
Much of his leadership was thus a form of pragmatic extremism , extreme action and the threat of more extreme action to comeMET , but used in the cause of more limited objectives .
He certainly heldMET deep convictions as to the absolute wrongness of the Liberal policies that he opposedNONMET , but at least a part of his apparent hostility was assumedMET for the occasion , a hard line that might secureMET a better compromise in the end .
So in his first major speech as leader in parliament he wastedNONMET little time on the customary compliments and warnedMET the government that he intendedNONMET to playMET hard .
In private conversation he toldNONMET Asquith " I am afraid that I shall have to showMET myself very vicious Mr Asquith this session .
I hopeNONMET you will understandNONMET .
" In later conversations about Ulster , Law was frank enough to pointMET out that bloodshed in Ulster would be the best way of ensuringNONMET an electoral landslide for the Unionists .
There was then an open toughness about party tactics ; before the Buckingham Palace Conference in 1914 he had Central Office work out the electoral effects of excludingMET nine , six or four counties of Ulster from an independent Ireland the concern of a calculating pragmatist not of a bigot .
From the party viewpoint Law's methods were successful but dangerous ; expectations raised when the party was in full cry were not easily setMET aside for an eventual compromise , and the only outcome that would fully vindicateNONMET the methods was the recovery of power .
The basis of recovery was then Law's fighting capacities as leader .
In parliament there would be a carefully organized campaign of resistance that would at least slowMET the government down and raiseMET Unionist morale .
Improved morale would also makeMET possible organizational advances outside parliament , all linkedMET to the issue of Ulster , and with the sights fixedMET firmly on the next election , an election that would makeMET or breakMET the Union , the Empire and Law's leadership of the party .
All was linkedMET to the sense of a new departure , a " new style " , a " new regime in politics " and a new team at the helm : as well as a new leader , the party had by the middle of 1912 a new Chief Whip , Party Chairman , party treasurer , principal agent , press adviser , and an almost entirely new team of Whips and organizers .
Party organization provided the easiest advances because it was the only area entirely under the party's control .
No general election was foughtMET by the organization set up after 1911 , but there is little doubt that there was a massive improvement ; criticisms that were commonplace in 1910 were not to be heardMET by 1913 .
The space available to Central Office was increasedNONMET by the acquisition of St Stephen's House as well as St Stephen's Chambers , which had been occupiedNONMET since 1874 ; the new office costNONMET $3,000 a year in rent alone .
The quality of the senior staff was improvedNONMET by the appointment of three specialists .
John Boraston took over as Principal Agent in 1912 , having been a professional organizer all his career and latterly chief agent to the Liberal Unionist Council .
He joinedMET William Jenkins , appointed chief organizing agent in 1911 and previously district agent for the Midlands Liberal Unionists .
The party was indeed handed over to Birmingham .
Finally , Malcolm Fraser , ex-editor of the Standard and of the Daily Express becameNONMET first honorary press adviser and subsequently was employedNONMET to runMET the press bureau at the colossal salary of £1,200 .
Steel-Maitland , Boraston , Jenkins and Fraser made up a team of experts , all of sufficient status to dealMET with politicians who might callNONMET into the office ; the work of the office was departmentalizedNONMET for the first time and the heads of department brought together into a supervising board .
The influence of Central Office toned up the rest of the organization .
A new canvass system was introducedMET in 1911 so that all county constituencies would operateMET the same system and so that duplicate records could be keptMET at area level .
This was important at a time when outvoters were a larger group in many constituencies than the size of the majority and when the outvoters were overwhelmingly Unionist .
In 1914 a register of car owners was compiledNONMET , also important when some voters could castMET several votes in an election when polling wentMET several days .
By November 1912 only fifty-one constituencies in Great Britain were without candidates , a much better position than the position at dissolution in either 1909 or 1910 ; few of these fifty-one constituencies were winnable , but in any case most of them had candidates by the end of 1913 .
A programme of speakers for a general election was also ready by 1913 , with both constituencies and politicians told in advance what they might expectMET .
The financial mismanagement that had reignedMET before 1911 was endedNONMET with the employment of professional accountants .
Expenditure on Central Office , district offices and the London office doubled from £32,466 in 1909–10 to $68,957 in 1913–14 ; the total expenditure of the party organization from central funds also doubledMET from $73,000 to over £150,000 .
To payNONMET for this outpouring , a great drive was mountedMET for additional income -by Farquhar and Steel-Maitland .
In 1912 ordinary subscriptions still broughtMET in only £12000 a year and it provedNONMET difficult to raiseMET them to anything like what was neededNONMET .
The method adoptedMET was to canvassNONMET for capital donations that could then be investedNONMET to bringMET in a regular income , and both Balfour and Law were usedNONMET to raiseMET the wind .
Steel-Maitland toldNONMET Balfour that " Farquhar and I are endeavouringNONMET to raiseMET more money .
I thinkNONMET we are likely to succeedNONMET — thanks in part to the very generous example setMET by Lord Rothschild .
But I would b , e very glad if I might seeNONMET you on your return to askNONMET you to helpNONMET me in two cases .
Systematic collections were madeMET from peers and from the City ; by the outbreak of war the invested funds amountedNONMET to $671,000 — twice the sum in 1911 and worth four years " expenditure — and there was a special cash deposit of £120,000 for the coming election .
In three other areas , as much political as organizational , advances were madeMET towards the management of the press , the coordination of the heterogeneous collection that made up the party , and the fostering of modern attitudes in the local parties .
Under Malcolm Fraser the party beganMET to makeMET effective use of its support in Fleet Street .
It had been recognizedMET that Liberals had been more adept at handlingMET the press because they were more ready to stoopMET to newspaper practices , as Sandars had reportedNONMET in 1909 : I toldNONMET Northcliffe that if his people would makeMET enquiries at our Central Office , he would findMET that our nightly regiment of speakers was at least as well worth reporting as the Radical contingent , but that I realizedNONMET that from the Press point of view , no doubt , our speakers did not play up to the reporters by> handingMET them their speeches in advance , and by other tricks of the kind to which the Radical orators have recourse .
This was the essence of the problem : the press could only be managedMET by someone who knewNONMET their methods and who would not expectNONMET them to come round to Central Office to searchMET for news .
The UOC foundMET that " it is patent that some feeling existsNONMET among the Unionist Press that , while in the past they have done much for the Party , the Party has not assistedMET in their work .
In many quarters it is assertedNONMET that the Unionist Press are treated with greater courtesy by the Radicals than by their own side .
" Fraser dealtMET with this problem without difficulty and explained to Law in 1913 that " the importance of gettingNONMET important speeches in advance is shownMET in concrete manner by your Wallsend speech on October 29th .
The verbatim reports reached most of the newspapers in places such as Aberdeen at one o " clock in the morning of the 30th .
" He wentMET on to quoteNONMET the response that had been receivedNONMET from editors : Manchester Dispatch : I hopeNONMET you will continueNONMET this form of enterprise .
You fully knowNONMET as an old pressman the difficulty of dealingMET with a big speech late at night … Daily Express : I am much obliged to you for the precis of Mr Bonar Law's speech last night .
It was a great help to us .
The speech cameMET over the wires so late and the sheets were so confused by the Post Office — which is usual in these cases — that without the precis we could not possibly have gotNONMET the leader through in time for the first edition .
So in the supply of information to newspapers predisposedMET to supportMET the party , much was achievedNONMET merely by employingNONMET a specialist .
The other side of press management , depending on informal contacts , is less easy to assessMET .
In 1911 Steel-Maitland invitedNONMET Blumenfeld of the Daily Express to Central Office for a two-way exchange of ideas and advice .
He also usedNONMET Law himself to impressMET editors who were on less familiar terms with Fraser , as with Marlowe of the Daily Mail , and Law tookMET a direct interest in negotiations with the most difficult of all the Unionist editors , J. L. Garvin of the Observer .
Law personally conducted the negotiations with Gardner Sinclair over the sale of the Observer and the Pall Mall Gazette in 1914 ; this negotiation also demonstratesMET that , as well as producing information and nursing editors , the party had to workMET hard to keepNONMET some of the newspapers in business .
Sinclair did buyNONMET the Observer and the Pall Mall in the end , but not before he had been givenMET a $45,000 guarantee from party funds .
Such investments had a double purpose , for they could bringMET in income and provideNONMET a political bonus .
One such scheme involvedNONMET the purchase of the Daily Express by Max Aitken with party funds , but the party was also proppingMET up the Globe , the Standard , and a wide range of provincial dailies .
All these transactions were secret , for there would be little use in keepingNONMET a paper alive if it were knownNONMET to be ownedMET by a political party .
The papers were therefore boughtNONMET through nominees or bank loans backedMET with party capital .
It was usual to extractMET some form of guarantee in exchange for party support but the secrecy prevented such undertakings from being enforcedNONMET .
Sinclair thus gaveMET an undertaking that his papers would always remainNONMET Unionist , but Steel-Maitland doubtedNONMET if such a promise had any value .
The later history of the Daily Express suggestsMET not : when the Express becameNONMET hostile in the 1920s , Younger ragedNONMET " when I thinkNONMET of the large sum of money this office has putMET into that gutter print it makesMET my blood boil " .
The justification for pouringMET out large sums without a certain return was the even greater cost of any real alternative .
The support for the Express in 1912 " providesNONMET for the introduction of £50,000 or $60,000 to retainNONMET the only half-penny paper the Party possessesMET in London , and no less a sum than $700,000 to £1 , 000,000 would be necessary to startNONMET a similar paper if the Daily Express were allowedMET to goMET .
The struggle therefore wentMET on to keepNONMET the Unionist press alive , and in 1912 and 1913 both Aitken and Northcliffe stoodMET by the party and gaveMET valuable support in their papers .
The coordination of competing party bodies was carried out with surprising ease .
The National Union was mergedNONMET with Central Office in 1911 and fusion with the Liberal Unionists followed in 1912 .
Joseph Chamberlain retainedNONMET his preference for independence but allowedNONMET himself to be overruledMET by Austen and by the overwhelming wishes of the Liberal Unionist Council to mergeNONMET .
To caterMET for all susceptibilities , the party becameNONMET the " National Unionist Association of Conservative and Unionist Associations " — a decision that allowedMET some local parties to goMET on callingNONMET themselves Conservative , but the name " Liberal " was at last droppedMET .
The Liberal Unionists were admittedMET to the Carlton Club and a longstanding source of tension was eradicatedNONMET .
This was in itself a striking commentary on what had already been done : Liberal Unionists who had resistedMET amalgamation under Balfour and Acland-Hood in 1911 acquiescedNONMET meekly under Law and Steel-Maitland in 1912 .
Other organizations could not be absorbed but could still be broughtMET within the Central Office orbit .
So in 1911 Steel-Maitland offeredNONMET to joinMET the Halsbury Club in order to guideMET it on to safer lines — and was immediately accusedNONMET of disloyalty by Walter Long .
Long helpedNONMET though by placingMET both Steel-Maitland and Boraston on the Executive Committee of the Union Defence League for the same purpose .
Steel-Maitland also explainedNONMET to Lord Robert Cecil that " it has been arrangedMET that the National Conservative Union should sendMET out leaflets producedNONMET by several of the ancillary organizations , such as the Tariff Reform League , the Anti-Socialist Union , the Primrose League , the London Municipal Society etc .
" The Central Office attitude was flexible , for outside bodies would always existNONMET and could even be madeMET use of : They representMET a time when either their objects were not the same as those of the official organization , or the CCO was not enterprising enough to suitMET them .
But some caution should be observedMET .
It may be wise , while retainingNONMET or regainingNONMET control , to tradeNONMET under different names .
In some cases additional subscriptions may be obtainedNONMET , in others full responsibility may be avoidedMET .
With open allies like the Primrose League , the case for collaboration was strong ; for the first time in thirty years of existence the Primrose League formally linkedMET itself with the party in 1914 .
On the other hand , the independence of the Tariff Reform League was a positive advantage : after January 1913 the party supportedMET the tariff policy but was not includingNONMET them in its immediate programme , so that Central Office could continueNONMET to distributeMET tariff propaganda from the TRL without compromising party policy .
In general , efforts to ensureNONMET better coordination were a matter of the patient building up of contacts , although the improved party morale and the greater efficiency of Central Office had removedMET their justification for existence .
TWENTY-EIGHT Nairobi .
We startNONMET with a young man , Thomas Fairfax , in military khaki and flying jacket , climbingNONMET into his old biplane and taxiingNONMET down a runway .
He adjustsNONMET the flaps , zips up his jacket , pullsNONMET down his goggles .
The runway is simply a strip of grass , cleared of rocks .
The plane lurches into motion .
It bouncesNONMET alarmingly as it gathersMET speed .
A few Africans , clutchingNONMET sticks and wearingNONMET skins , watchNONMET the plane as it turnsMET , pausesMET , and then acceleratesNONMET , leavingMET a cloud of dust .
The plane climbsMET reluctantly , one set of wings dippingMET drunkenly .
Soon it is passingNONMET over the spectacular Rift Valley .
There is no sign of civilization , but herds of zebra and wildebeest and clumps of elephants marble the valley floor .
OlNONMET Doinyo Lengai .
A group of Masai is clearing stones from a stretch of grassland , in the shadow of the Mountain of God .
A large white cross has been paintedNONMET roughly on the ground .
Claudia Cohn-Casson is sittingNONMET under an enormous African fig tree near by , at a camp table spreadNONMET with a Somali cloth .
She has in front of her a typewriter , her recorder and her notes .
A servant is preparingNONMET lunch on a fire .
Claudia hearsNONMET something .
She looksNONMET up into the sky in the direction of Ol Doinyo Lengai .
We catchMET sight of a small plane circlingNONMET the mountain .
It dipsMET its wings in acknowledgement of the landing strip , and circles , preparingMET to landNONMET .
Claudia standsNONMET up .
She checksNONMET her appearance in a mirror hangingNONMET on a tree .
With her lower lip she tucksNONMET the upper lip into her mouth for a moment .
She is wearingNONMET a long fitted skirt of khaki .
She adjustsNONMET her hat , a round bush hat , and walks towards the makeshift landing strip .
The plane is taxiing , pursuedNONMET by a group of running Masai warriors , glorious in their red and purple robes , ochred hair , lion head-dresses and so on .
Claudia walksNONMET over towards the plane .
She holdsNONMET her hat on her head with one hand .
The plane is still now , surroundedNONMET by the warriors .
Fairfax is securingNONMET its wheels with rocks .
He looksNONMET up to seeNONMET her approaching .
Behind her is Ol Doinyo Lengai .
Its strange shape has becomeNONMET familiar to us .
His face is still dirty from the dust and oil , except that around his eyes is a white patch where the goggles were .
The Masai beginNONMET to singNONMET .
It is a strange , other-worldly noise .
Claudia and Fairfax approach each other .
The moment is unnaturally , poignantly , delayed .
In his uniform , jacket unzipped , he is handsome and smiling .
The singing of the Masai and the overwhelming landscape are thrilling .
Claudia and Fairfax comeNONMET closer .
She is serene .
He is perhaps surprised by her composure .
She kissesNONMET him , three times .
‘ I am so glad you cameNONMET .
’ ( Her accent is very French but she speaksNONMET English fluently .
) ‘ Anything to helpNONMET a friend .
’ Fairfax is awkward .
He would likeNONMET to sayNONMET something more graceful .
‘ Your face is dirty .
You lookNONMET , how you sayNONMET ?
, as a raccoon .
’ Fairfax laughsNONMET .
He wipesNONMET his face with his sleeve .
‘ Sorry .
’ ‘ I have preparedNONMET the lunch .
’ She touchesNONMET his arm lightly .
They startNONMET to walkNONMET the short distance to her camp .
The throng of Masai surroundsNONMET them .
Her servant bringsNONMET a bowl of hot water for Fairfax .
He washesNONMET his face .
The Masai watch all this .
Fairfax and Claudia sitNONMET down on camp chairs .
The Masai standNONMET a short distance off , curious , but self-absorbed .
‘ What would you likeNONMET to drinkNONMET ?
’ ‘ Can you manageMET a brandy and soda ?
’ ‘ I thinkNONMET so .
’ She speaksNONMET Swahili to the servant .
‘ Now , do you wantNONMET to tellNONMET me all the facts ?
’ ‘ As far as I knowNONMET them .
Yes .
The Masai who has been arrestedNONMET , Tepilit , is from this district .
These people are from his engang .
He was supposed to deliverNONMET a bull to the district officer , it was about three weeks ago , and he decidedNONMET at the last moment to replaceNONMET the bull with another one .
But the district officer , Miles Turnbull , would not acceptNONMET it … ’ Her face , as she removesNONMET her hat and beginsNONMET to speakNONMET , is startlingly beautiful , although not conventionally .
Fairfax watchesNONMET her .
As she talksNONMET the servant bringsNONMET the drinks and then the lunch , a grilled fowl with some preserves .
As she speaksNONMET we seeNONMET a Masai market .
SpreadMET around are hundreds of Masai men and women .
Some of the women are in robes of blue , others are in brown , dyed skins .
The older men have blankets loosely slungNONMET over their shoulders .
Almost every man is accompaniedMET by a goat or a cow , held on a short leather thong or controlledMET by a thin stick .
Those animals are accustomed to the Masai .
There is , incongruously , an open car to one side of the market .
From it , into the colourful throng , appearsNONMET a young British district officer , Miles Turnbull .
He is carryingNONMET some papers and is accompaniedNONMET by two askaris with rifles , and an interpreter , dressedNONMET in khakis .
The askaris wear military sweaters , Sam Brownes , shorts and socks .
On their heads they wearNONMET fezes .
‘ The whole thing was ridiculous and tragic .
This man was very much likedNONMET by the Masai .
But he was overworked .
He had to collectNONMET the cattle and makeMET sure that every boma was contributingNONMET his fair share .
His district stretchesMET nearly one hundred and fifty miles .
I likedNONMET him , even though he was a little bit boring .
He was so English .
He could not speakNONMET Masai so he always was accompaniedNONMET by this man , a Nandi , who , I am afraid , does not speakNONMET Masai very good .
’ ‘ Very well .
Sorry .
’ ‘ Very well .
So the laibon's son from up there , up the valley past Lengai , he is a descendant of Mbatian , the great laibon , he triesNONMET to persuadeNONMET Turnbull to letNONMET him take out his animal from the ones which have been selectedNONMET .
‘ The young warrior , Tepilit , is arguingNONMET with the district officer .
He is still vividly scarredNONMET from his recent encounter with a lion .
His face is paintedNONMET and he is carryingNONMET a spear .
On his head he wearsNONMET a head-dress of lion mane .
Turnbull explainsNONMET through the interpreter that time is short ; it is late ; there is a great war on with the Germans .
He can not waitNONMET for the proposed exchange of animals .
But he triesNONMET to be reasonable .
‘ How long will it takeMET , anyway ?
’ ‘ Tomorrow it will be ready .
I will bringNONMET it .
’ ‘ It will be too late .
TellNONMET him that I am very sorry but I can not makeMET exceptions .
He has had plenty of time .
’ The Masai warrior , Tepilit , is excited .
A number of other Masai gatherNONMET round .
He saysNONMET that this particular animal is a favourite .
He strokesNONMET its side , which is white and marked with round patches of black , like islands on a naïvely drawn map .
It is a beautiful animal , with huge , curved horns .
‘ I will bringNONMET you two cattle tomorrow .
I will goNONMET now and deliverNONMET them myself to Narok .
’ ‘ TellNONMET him I am very sorry , but I must fillMET the quota .
’ Turnbull busiesNONMET himself with his clipboard as his reply is translatedNONMET .
‘ TakeNONMET the animal now , ’ he saysNONMET to his assistant gently .
As they moveNONMET forward , Tepilit , without warning , hurlsNONMET his spear at the district officer from a few feet away .
It is a heavy weapon .
Between the knife-shaped iron blade and the tapered tail of the spear is a rounded handle made from a particularly hard tree .
This piece of wood passesNONMET right through Turnbull , so that he is skewered .
A fountain of blood at first poursNONMET from his chest , but soon subsidesMET becomeNONMET a steady trickle .
Tepilit watches as the district officer performsNONMET a brief hokey-cokey before fallingNONMET face down .
This drivesNONMET the spear almost completely through his body .
Nobody movesNONMET .
The watching Masai beginNONMET to walkNONMET away after a long , contemplative moment .
They seemNONMET to be weighingMET the incident carefully in their minds .
The askaris panic .
They cockMET their rifles and fire into the air .
Now they guardNONMET the body , which is motionless in a lake of blood that is rapidly dryingMET , drunkMET by the thirsty , insatiable soil .
You can almost hearNONMET the soil gulping .
Tepilit drivesNONMET his bull away .
He walksNONMET without a backward glance .
He has in one hand a stick and is followedNONMET by a thin dog .
This little group beginsNONMET to mountNONMET a hill .
Nobody makesMET a move to stopNONMET him .
The strange singing of the Masai rises .
From a distance we seeNONMET Tepilit , walkingNONMET steadily towards Ol Doinyo Lengai with his animals .
They are tiny figures in a huge landscape .
Fairfax has finishedNONMET eatingNONMET , but Claudia's food is untouched .
‘ The next day he presentedNONMET himself for arrest .
’ ‘ Did you knowNONMET this man ?
’ ‘ I knewNONMET his family well .
’ ‘ Did you seeNONMET him after the killing ?
’ ‘ He cameNONMET to my house and toldNONMET me what had happenedNONMET .
’ ‘ And you toldNONMET him to giveNONMET himself up ?
’ ‘ Of course .
What else should I do ?
’ ‘ I'm just askingNONMET .
If I can do anything I must knowNONMET the facts .
’ ‘ The facts are not so clear .
This man , Tepilit , was injuredNONMET helpingNONMET me with the filming of a lion hunt .
Now I must helpNONMET him .
’ ‘ When is the trial ?
’ ‘ It's not arrangedNONMET yet .
But I have triedNONMET to talkNONMET to him , to persuadeNONMET him to sayNONMET that he thoughtNONMET the askaris were goingNONMET to shootNONMET him or that it was a misunderstanding , but he refuseNONMET absolutely to excuseNONMET himself .
’ ‘ I'll talkNONMET to him .
I'll talkNONMET to the DC .
I heardNONMET about the lion hunt .
SoundsNONMET a bit of a balls-up .
’ ‘ A balls-up ?
It was worse than a balls-up .
It was a disaster .
His brother was killedNONMET .
All for a film .
And that bastard , un vrai salaud — do you speakNONMET French ?
— Leavitt walkedNONMET away very happy .
’ ‘ He was the producer ?
’ ‘ He was an exploiter .
He didn't careNONMET about the Masai .
He wantedNONMET blood , any blood .
Lions , Masai , all equal .
’ ‘ Why do you thinkNONMET he did it ?
The moran , I meanNONMET ?
’ ‘ I don't knowNONMET .
’ There is a pause .
‘ Shall we takeMET some coffee now ?
’ Claudia summonsNONMET her servant who bringsNONMET a coffee pot .
‘ I'll goNONMET and seeNONMET him tomorrow .
Don't worryMET .
’ The jail at Ngiro Narok .
It is a small police post with cells at the back .
In front of the building is a row of white-painted stones and some cactus-like sisal plants formingNONMET a circle around a patch of grass .
In the middle of the grass is a flagpole from which the Union Jack hangsNONMET .
A car pulls up outside .
An askari salutesNONMET as Fairfax steps out of the car in uniform .
He entersNONMET the building .
A young white policeman appearsNONMET from his office reluctantly .
He straightens up and salutesNONMET Fairfax .
‘ Sorry , Major .
I'm Sergeant Jeavons , sir .
’ ‘ Major Fairfax .
I wantNONMET to talkNONMET to the Masai man you are holdingMET .
I have the papers .
’ ‘ Are you the defence , sir ?
’ ‘ No , I'm here to makeMET a report to the governor .
’ The sergeant's face is elaborately composedMET .
In a bare , mud-walled cell , sittingNONMET on the floor , is Tepilit .
He does not appearNONMET to be disheartenedNONMET .
He looksNONMET at Fairfax without fear .
From behind the sergeant , an askari shoutsNONMET at Tepilit .
‘ Stand up man .
Attention .
’ Fairfax speaksNONMET to Tepilit in Maa .
‘ I hopeNONMET you are well , Tepilit ole Saibol .
’ Then he turnsNONMET to the policeman : ‘ That's fine , sergeant .
You may leaveNONMET me here .
’ Fairfax shakesNONMET hands with Tepilit and sitsNONMET on small stool .
Tepilit squats on the floor .
‘ How are you ?
’ ‘ I am fine .
’ ‘ What age group are you ?
’ ‘ Botorok .
’ ‘ Is your father the laibon ?
’ ‘ Yes .
He is descendedMET from Mbatian .
’ ‘ You have killedNONMET a lion .
’ ‘ Hooh .
I am praisedNONMET because I heldNONMET it by the tail .
’ ‘ Does your father have many cattle ?
’ ‘ We are owners of many cattle .
’ ‘ I am happy .
Do you knowNONMET me ?
’ ‘ You are the friend of Claudia from the government .
‘ ‘ I am a friend of Claudia .
I am a soldier .
At the moment , as you knowNONMET , the white people and their friends are fightingNONMET with the Germans .
This is a very big war .
’ ‘ Our people also fought the Germans .
’ ‘ Your people foughtNONMET very bravely .
’ ‘ The Masai are brave .
’ ‘ We knowNONMET this .
We honourNONMET the Masai above all people .
’ ‘ What do you wantNONMET to discussNONMET ?
’ ‘ I am here because I was askedNONMET to comeNONMET by Claudia .
She wantsNONMET me to talkNONMET to you .
’ ‘ There is no need .
I have toldNONMET her everything that happenedNONMET .
’ ‘ She is unhappy .
She does not wantNONMET you to be triedNONMET by the government .
’ ‘ We are betrothed .
She is my little heifer .
’ Fairfax is stunned .
It takesMET him a moment to regainNONMET his composure .
‘ You are goingNONMET to be married ?
’ ‘ She must first askNONMET her father who livesNONMET far away .
’ ‘ Do you realize what will happenNONMET to you if you are tried ?
’ Tepilit makesMET a gesture by placingNONMET his hand to his throat and cuppingNONMET it .
‘ I can't seeMET any point in that .
When you killedNONMET the district officer it was an accident .
’ ‘ I killedNONMET him on purpose .
’ ‘ What I wantNONMET to sayNONMET is this , there was a misunderstanding .
I will tellNONMET the government .
You thoughtNONMET the Nandi , the fat belly , wantedNONMET the askaris to shootNONMET you .
’ ‘ No .
I did not .
The white man toldNONMET the askaris to takeNONMET my animal after I had offeredNONMET to exchangeNONMET it .
He tookNONMET my best animal , even though I offeredNONMET two in its place .
That is why I killedNONMET him .
And now my family have offeredNONMET forty-nine cattle to his family , but the government will not takeNONMET them to giveNONMET to his family in England .
’ ‘ White men have different customs .
’ ‘ They don't likeNONMET cattle .
’ ‘ Some like cattle .
I have many cattle on my farm .
’ ‘ Are they milkNONMET cattle livingNONMET in a house as I have heardNONMET ?
’ ‘ Not all .
Many are Masai cattle .
Tepilit ole Saibol , I have a heavy burden .
Only you can helpNONMET me .
I have to talkNONMET to the governor .
I have to explainNONMET to him what happenedNONMET .
The Nandi man has runNONMET away , frightened .
I can sayNONMET to the governor that you misunderstoodNONMET the order and triedNONMET to defendNONMET yourself .
Not the district officer's order , but the translator's who spokeNONMET too fast without proper consideration , as Nandi people do , and the askaris pointedNONMET their guns at you .
You threwNONMET the spear wildly .
Unfortunately the district officer stepped forward .
If I tellNONMET him that they will fine you .
‘ Many of my people sawNONMET me .
They knowNONMET that I killedNONMET him on purpose because he tookNONMET my best animal .
’ ‘ If you sayNONMET that at your trial , they will killNONMET you .
’ ‘ I have offeredNONMET cattle to his family .
I can do no more .
’ Fairfax stands up .
‘ ThinkNONMET about what I saidNONMET .
I will come back .
’ ‘ GoNONMET in peace .
’ ‘ Please God .
’ Tepilit does not standNONMET up .
He seemsNONMET content .
The sergeant meetsNONMET Fairfax outside the cell .
‘ All right , sir ?
’ ‘ Not really .
Has he madeMET a statement ?
’ ‘ Yes , sir .
He admitsMET killingNONMET the DO .
No excuses .
’ ‘ Can I readNONMET his statement ?
’ ‘ I'm afraid it's goneMET off to the High Court , sir .
’ ‘ You haven't gotNONMET a copy here ?
’ ‘ We haven't had any carbon paper for two years , sir .
’ ‘ Was it takenMET down by a policeman ?
’ ‘ Yes , sir .
By me , sir .
’ ‘ Do you speakNONMET Masai ?
’ ‘ No , sir , but we got the Larusa translator in .
He's the official police translator , sir .
We readNONMET it back to the man twice .
It tookMET me most of a whole day , sir .
’ In the cell Tepilit sitsNONMET motionless on the floor .
At Claudia's camp it is almost evening .
The light in the sky is there by courtesy of the vanished sun , but the tops of the mountains are still golden , as though honey had been poured lightly over them .
Fairfax's car appearsNONMET , the lights hoppingMET and bouncing down the track .
Claudia rises .
Fairfax steps out of the car .
Claudia comesNONMET to greetNONMET him and kissesNONMET him lightly on both cheeks .
‘ How was he ?
’ ‘ Stubborn .
’ ‘ He would not agreeNONMET ?
’ ‘ No .
‘ ‘ Would you likeNONMET something to drinkNONMET ?
’ They are approachingNONMET the fire .
Fairfax stopsNONMET .
‘ He toldNONMET me you two were pakiteng , little heifers .
’ ‘ It's true .
I didn't knowNONMET what it meantMET .
I did not takeMET it seriously .
’ ‘ Did you acceptNONMET any gifts ?
’ ‘ He was very sick after the lion gotNONMET him and he gaveNONMET me his necklace .
He was in a fever .
I had no idea he wantedNONMET me to marryNONMET him when he has his head shavedNONMET .
’ ‘ What a balls-up .
Claudia , the problem is that one Masai , cruel as this may soundNONMET , is not consideredNONMET very important .
I have flownNONMET my plane with cadged army fuel six hundred miles .
I am supposed to be at GHQ .
They won't holdMET up proceedings while we talkNONMET to him .
I've only gotMET until tomorrow .
’ ‘ Please , Tom .
’ She touchesNONMET his arm .
‘ Please , Tom .
It is completely crazy .
There's a war , the Germans are tryingNONMET to killNONMET every Jew in the world and you are goingNONMET to hangNONMET one Masai because of a misunderstanding .
’ ‘ There's no misunderstanding , unfortunately .
He seemsNONMET determined to dieNONMET .
’ ‘ Determined to dieNONMET .
Can you talkNONMET to his family ?
’ ‘ I will tryNONMET .
I will also getNONMET the translation of his evidence .
Maybe I can putMET some doubts into the governor's mind about its admissibility .
’ A boma near Ol Doinyo Lengai .
Fairfax and Claudia are meetingNONMET the Masai .
They are sittingNONMET on stools in the middle of the cattle enclosure talkingNONMET to Tepilit's father , Sentue .
Around them graceful Masai women in long leather skirts are sweepingNONMET the boma and plasteringNONMET the huts with cow dung .
In the distance we can hearNONMET cowbells .
Sentue is a grand , dignified figure of about sixty-five .
He is wearingNONMET a blue tunic and around his shoulders is a fur cloak made of the skins of the hyrax .
In his hands he holdsNONMET a snuff box , shaped like a small quiver , and a thin stick .
Two warriors , one of whom is Saibol , Tepilit's younger brother , stand at a distance .
Sentue is speakingNONMET .
It is clear that he has been speakingNONMET for some time .
‘ We have many problems with the government .
They wantNONMET to takeNONMET our cows to payNONMET for the war .
We giveNONMET them our cows .
Every time they collectNONMET our cows , they promiseNONMET to giveNONMET us something in return , but the next time askNONMET for more cows .
Our cows are our life .
I am a rich man .
I have many cows and many children .
I have offeredNONMET many cows to payNONMET this man's family .
But the government wantsNONMET to takeMET away my son also .
Why do they do this ?
’ This is the way our law is .
You can not killNONMET a man deliberately .
’ ‘ If you have been reasonable , if you are offeringNONMET your own wealth , two cows instead of one , and he will not listenNONMET , if he thinksNONMET you are a small man and will not listenNONMET to your suggestions , why not ?
You must killNONMET him .
’ ‘ You can't killNONMET a white man in this way .
’ ‘ A white man has blood , red blood also .
’ ‘ The white man has blood .
That is true .
But the white man does not believeNONMET that cattle are payment for takingMET someone's life .
’ The Masai , Sentue , findsMET this hard to believeNONMET .
He turnsNONMET his old head wearily , as if to indicateNONMET to his family the kind of people he has to dealMET with these days .
Claudia speaksNONMET : ‘ Your son must sayNONMET it was an accident .
Major Fairfax will speakNONMET to the government .
’ ‘ I toldNONMET my son only trouble could comeMET from being your pakiteng .
’ The old man saysNONMET this without rancour .
It is , in his mind ‘ a fact .
Claudia is upset .
She touchesNONMET Fairfax's arm for support .
Fairfax shoutsNONMET : ‘ You are a stupid man .
This woman has comeNONMET from far away to writeNONMET about your people .
She did not understandNONMET what your son wanted from her .
Why does he wantNONMET to marryNONMET a white woman ?
Does he thinkNONMET she will spendMET the rest of her life milking his cows and goats ?
Don't be stupid .
’ Sentue takesMET a few moments to replyNONMET .
‘ There is nothing wrong with milking cows and goats .
’ Claudia interruptsNONMET .
‘ Ole Sentue , I agreeNONMET with you .
I have to goNONMET to my country to seeNONMET my father .
I am sure he would wishNONMET me to marryNONMET with someone in our tribe .
But in any case I can not marryNONMET your son .
In our country to exchangeNONMET gifts does not meanMET the same thing .
I was a stupid woman .
I did not understandNONMET .
’ ‘ Because you have comeNONMET here my son is goingNONMET to be killedNONMET .
HangedNONMET like a chicken by his neck , in town .
’ ‘ No , no , please .
Major Fairfax will helpNONMET him .
But he must helpNONMET himself .
’ She is weeping .
Fairfax approachesNONMET very close to the laibon , between them .
The laibon speaksNONMET to Claudia , ignoringNONMET him .
‘ How can Fahfakhs saveNONMET him ?
Your people do not believeNONMET it is right to offerNONMET cows to his family .
Fahfakhs saidNONMET that .
They wantNONMET to killNONMET him .
He did nothing to them , but they wantNONMET to killNONMET him .
I have lookedNONMET at the stones .
They will killNONMET him .
’ Fairfax graspsNONMET the old man by his wrist .
‘ Laibon , great-grandson of Mbatian , you must thinkNONMET again .
The white people are having a war with the Germans .
The Masai have been good friends .
The government will helpNONMET your son , but he must not sayNONMET that he killedNONMET the white man on purpose .
Ole Sentue Simel , you must speakNONMET to your son .
’ The laibon simply looksNONMET down at the floor of the boma .
He is not prepared to discussNONMET this dishonourable argument .
His face is adamantine .
Claudia rises .
She offersNONMET her hand in the Masai manner , her head bowed .
‘ StayNONMET in peace .
Tom , we must goNONMET .
’ ‘ GoNONMET in peace .
’ They leaveNONMET the boma .
The laibon standsNONMET to watchNONMET them goNONMET .
They walkNONMET together towards their car .
There are tears in Claudia's eyes .
She turnsNONMET to Fairfax .
‘ He will not talkNONMET to his son .
’ He stridesNONMET stiffly and angrily .
‘ Claudia , you are supposed to understandNONMET them .
What can he tellNONMET him ?
Can he sayNONMET to him , ‘ You must stopNONMET being a Masai .
You must tellNONMET lies like the muzungus ’ ?
I will tryNONMET to getMET him off .
But I'm not so sure now if it's possible .
’ ‘ You must do it , ’ Tom .
My work here will be finishedNONMET if he is hangedNONMET .
I can't supportMET it .
It's too terrible .
’ They climbNONMET into the car and set off .
Behind them , Ol Doinyo Lengai is catchingMET the late afternoon sunlight .
They driveNONMET down into a dry watercourse and are surroundedNONMET by hundreds of cattle returningNONMET from their grazing , drivenNONMET by children and young warriors .
They cutMET the engine to allowNONMET the animals to passNONMET undisturbed .
Claudia sitsNONMET with her eyes downcast .
A child greetsNONMET her , but a young warrior strikesNONMET the child with a stick .
‘ My heart is breakingMET , ’ she saysNONMET .
Fairfax turnsNONMET to her .
Her face is shaded from him in the failing light .
‘ I will do what I can , I promiseNONMET .
’ She kissesNONMET Fairfax .
They sitNONMET in the dust of the vanished cattle .
‘ Claudia , you are beautiful .
You lookNONMET so beautiful .
I can't bearMET it that you are unhappy .
Did you loveNONMET him ?
I have to askNONMET .
’ ‘ You knowNONMET , that is an impossible question .
In one way I lovedNONMET them all .
I have livedNONMET here for nearly five years .
Sometimes for many months I was the only white person for hundreds of miles .
I was very grateful to him .
I was guilty because he was nearly killedNONMET .
Another man was killedNONMET in the ridiculous filming .
I believedNONMET I owedNONMET him some debt .
That boy will do anything for me , even up to gettingNONMET himself killedNONMET by a lion .
So I lovedNONMET him .
Yes , I lovedNONMET him , but I lovedNONMET him in my Masai self .
Do you understandNONMET me ?
Do you knowNONMET what my professor saidNONMET ?
He saidNONMET that the most important thing in the world , I meanNONMET our world , is to liveNONMET la vraie vieNONMET .
I believedNONMET I was the first anthropologist in France to understandNONMET what this meansMET .
I was tryingNONMET to liveNONMET the real Masai life .
’ ‘ Is that possible ?
’ ‘ Obviously not .
But at least I was not tryingNONMET to standMET completely outside this life with my little notebook .
I can't leaveNONMET this district with one man hangedNONMET and another killed and somehow because of me .
I can't .
My life would be finishedMET .
You have to helpNONMET me , Tom .
’ 3 .
Steady currents 3.1 .
The basic equations IN this chapter we shall be concerned with phenomena in which the main role is playedMET by the current of charged particles .
All our variables can be functions of space but are independent of time .
It is easy to presentMET the relevant equations ; we have all of eqns ( 1.1 ) -(1.7) but have to substituteMET a/at = O , yieldingMET [formula] .
There is a difficulty with eqn ( 3.6 ) .
It is correct for most of the chapter with [formula] takenMET as a constant but breaksMET down for ferromagnetic materials , which will be discussedNONMET in Section 3.11 .
All the other equations are all right but will not necessarily provideNONMET the simplest starting point for solvingNONMET a given problem .
We shall , therefore , introduceMET a number of alternative formulations .
First , we could searchMET for some analogue of the potential function which provedNONMET so useful in electrostatics .
We foundMET there that by choosingNONMET a scalar function in the form [formula] we could automatically satisfyMET the other equation for the electric field strength , [formula] .
Can we do the same thing for the magnetic quantities ?
No , but we can do a similar thing .
Since it is the equation [formula] that needsNONMET to be satisfied , we should chooseNONMET the potential as a vector ( calledMET , not without logic , the vector potential ) , definedMET by the equation [formula] .
SubstitutingMET the above equation into eqn ( 3.1 ) we getMET [formula] , or usingNONMET the vector relation ( eqn ( A.6 ) ) we obtainMET the modified form [formula] .
This equation can be further simplifiedNONMET to [formula] by choosing ( in the physicist's jargon this is calledMET choosingNONMET the gauge ) [formula] .
Can we do that ?
One can't usually assignMET some arbitrary value to the divergence of a vector function .
In the present case , however , we do have some freedom of choice .
The definition of A by eqn ( 3.8 ) is not unique .
If we addNONMET to A the gradient of a scalar function , the resulting vector A' still givesMET the same magnetic field because [formula] .
Hence a suitable choice of will ensureNONMET that [formula] .
So we are leftMET with eqn ( 3.11 ) .
If the current density is specifiedNONMET , eqn ( 3.11 ) will provideNONMET the solution for A from which B can be determinedNONMET .
How can we findMET a solution for A ?
There is nothing easier .
We only needNONMET to rememberNONMET the differential equation for the scalar potential [formula] ( eqn ( 2.12 ) ) and its solution in the form of eqn ( 2.24 ) .
By analogy the general solution of eqn ( 3.11 ) is [formula] .
A simple integration will yieldMET A if J is givenMET .
We shall goMET through a number of examples later .
For the moment letNONMET us useNONMET the above expression for derivingMET Biot-Savart's law .
First we shall assumeMET that the current density is confinedNONMET to a thin wire in which case the integration variable may be changedNONMET to [formula] , where S is a vector normal to the cross-section , [formula] is the area of the cross-section , and dI is an elementary vector along the tangent of the wire .
NotingNONMET further that J.S = I and that I must be constant along the wire we may writeNONMET eqn ( 3.15 ) in the modified form [formula] , whence the magnetic field strength is [formula] .
We have to stopMET here for a moment to sortMET out the coordinates .
As may be seenNONMET in Fig. 3.1 the coordinates of the wire element are x' , y' , z' , whereas the coordinates of the point where we wishNONMET to determineNONMET the magnetic field are setNONMET of coordinates .
Thus the curl operatesMET on the coordinates of P but not on those of dl leading to [formula] where ir is the unit vector in the direction r and we have madeMET use of the vector relation ( A3 ) in the Appendix .
This is Biot-Savart's law derived directly from Maxwell's equations .
Are there any other ways of determiningNONMET the magnetic field ?
Well , one can useNONMET eqn ( 3.1 ) as it is , but very often one is better off by usingNONMET its integral form that can be obtainedMET by integratingMET both sides of eqn ( 3.1 ) over a surface [formula] .
By usingMET Stokes ' theorem for the left-hand -side and recognizingNONMET that the integral of the current density givesMET the current , the above equation reducesMET to [formula] , where the line integration is along the curve C enclosingNONMET the surface .
The positive sense of the integration path is definedNONMET relative to the positive current direction according to the usual right-hand convention .
Equation 3.21 ) is knownNONMET as Ampère's law .
We have now a number of equations describingMET the same thing .
Which equation should we useNONMET in a practical case , the equation for the vector potential , Ampère's law , Biot-Savart's law , or attack directly Maxwell's equations ?
It's hard to tellMET .
Experience with practical calculations helpsMET , but even after years of work one usually remainsMET this side of infallibility .
I regretNONMET to sayMET that there are no general guidelines available .
If one managesMET to findMET the simplest method at the first attempt that can mostly be attributedNONMET to good luck .
Can we claimNONMET then that the vector potential is as useful as its scalar counterpart in electrostatics ?
For computational purposes the answer is an unambiguous no .
It is always laborious to findMET the components of a vector , so we are not much better off with A than with H or B. It turns out however that A is a more basic quantity of physics than B. Since B is givenMET by the curl of A it is possible that A is finite while its curl is zero .
Interestingly , under these conditions A has an effect on certain quantum-mechanical phenomena It would be unfair both to the vector potential and to quantum mechanics to sayMET that none of those formulations have engineering applications ( in fact the most sensitive magnetometer builtNONMET to date is basedMET on that kind of theory ) , but by and large engineers wouldn't loseMET much sleep if the use of A were bannedMET with immediate effect .
The vector potential is not a popular variable among engineers , maybe because it is not directly measurable .
There are no instruments capable to measureNONMET the magnitude or direction of A. In my opinion A is a useful thing if used with moderation .
It helpedMET us to deriveMET Biot-Savart's law , it will comeMET handy later in solvingNONMET certain radiation problems , and it often leadsMET to nice formulae , e.g. for the magnetic flux crossingNONMET a surface , defined as [formula] that may be rewrittenNONMET in terms of the vector potential as followsMET : [formula] where C is the curve enclosingNONMET the surface .
We have now collectedNONMET a good number of formulae which will serveMET us well in the following sections .
Before goingMET on , just a few words about the classification of steady currents .
It may be roughly dividedMET into two parts : magnetostatics and the rest .
We shall discussNONMET the rest first ( Sections 3.2–3.5 ) , and that will giveMET us some idea of the relative significance of electric and magnetic fields .
Sections 3.6–3.16 are concerned with magnetostatics , where electric fields are assumedMET to be zero and the interrelationship of J , H , and B are studiedMET .
Since we have so many variables , and since in each physical configuration only some of them appearMET , we will recordNONMET ( just for this chapter ) the non-zero variables in each section heading .
3.2 .
The defocusing of an electron beam ( J , E , D , p , H , B ) We have so far talkedNONMET about positive and negative charges , about point charges , and distributed charge .
I shall now introduceMET the concept of an elementary charge , 1.6 × 10 -19 C , carriedMET by an elementary particle called the electron .
This is not a necessity .
It is possible to studyMET electromagnetic theory without ever mentioningNONMET the word electron , but since it has becomeNONMET such a household word and is usedNONMET so often we can just as well makeMET use of it .
In the present section we shall considerMET a cylindrical electron beam of radius a in which the charge density is uniform ( p = Po ) and all electrons travel with velocity v. We are not goingMET to enquireNONMET into the details how such beams can be producedNONMET ( it belongsNONMET to the subject of physical electronics ) ; we shall acceptNONMET the fact that the beam existsNONMET and will tryNONMET to work out the forces on the outermost electrons .
There is now cylindrical symmetry and a net charge per unit length [formula] , yieldingMET for the radial component of the electric field [formula] .
The magnetic field may be obtainedMET from Ampère's law ( eqn ( 3.21 ) ) as followsMET [formula] , where the line integral is takenMET over the circle of radius a ( Fig. 3.2 ) , I is the total current of the beam and [formula] is the azimuthal component of the magnetic field in the cylindrical coordinate system specifiedMET by [formula .
From eqn ( 3.26 ) we getMET [formula .
The electric force on an electron of charge e travelling at the edge of the beam ( R = a ) is it is in the radial direction pointingMET outwards .
The magnetic force is perpendicular both to the direction of motion ( +z axis ) and the direction of magnetic field ( [formula direction ) .
The vectorial product v X B givesMET an inward force in the radial direction .
Hence the net force on the electron is [formula .
NotingNONMET that [formula and anticipatingNONMET the relationship [formula to be derivedMET in Section 5.7 , we getMET the following formula for the force [formula , where c is the velocity of light .
It may be seenMET from the above equation that the magnetic force is negligible in comparison with the electric force unless the velocity of the electron approachesMET the velocity of light .
Thus the conclusion is that , owing to the repulsive forces between the electrons , a cylindrical electron beam is unstable .
UsingNONMET a technical term borrowed from electron optics we could sayMET that the electron beam getsNONMET defocused .
The other conclusion ( as far as it is permissible to generalizeNONMET from a single example ) is more important in principle .
It is concerned with the relative magnitudes of electric and magnetic forces .
Since charged particles rarely travelMET close to the velocity of light we may concludeNONMET that the magnetic forces are by orders of magnitude smaller than the electric forces .
Why is it then that we have no difficulties in practice in observingNONMET magnetic fields ?
The reason is , of course , that there are two kinds of electric charges and their effect usually cancelsMET , so the small magnetic field has a chance of gettingNONMET observedNONMET .
And that bringsMET us to the ext example .
3.3 Pinch effect ( J , H , B ) In contrast to our previous example we shall now investigateMET a cylindrical beam consistingNONMET of two kinds of charge carriers : negative electrons and some positive particles , which I do not wishNONMET to be more precise about at the moment .
We shall assumeMET that the two kinds of particles have equal densities and move in opposite directions .
As a result there is no net space charge and hence no electric field .
The currents , on the other hand , do not cancelMET because they representNONMET opposite charges movingNONMET in opposite directions ( rememberNONMET , minus one timesNONMET minus one is equal to plus one ) .
The magnetic field strength is givenMET again by eqn ( 3.27 ) ; we only needNONMET to substituteMET for the current In + Ip where the subscripts n and p referMET to negative and positive particles respectively .
Hence the magnetic force on the electron at the edge of the beam ( at R = a ) is [formula , and on the positive particle is [formula .
NoteNONMET that the force is inwards , and in the same direction for both particles .
LetNONMET us distinguishNONMET two cases .
Both particles are mobile In that case both of them will moveNONMET inwards under the effect of magnetic force .
But if the diameter of the beam is reducedNONMET , eqns ( 3.33 ) and ( 3.34 ) tellMET us that the forces are even larger .
What happensNONMET then ?
If everything was uniform then the beam diameter would goMET on decreasing .
In practice however the beam is not uniform and does not possessMET perfect cylindrical symmetry .
Under these conditions the motion of the particles is fairly complicated , and of course our model is unable to predictMET the detailed behaviour of the particles .
Nevertheless a few qualitative conclusions may be drawnMET without doing any further mathematics .
If the cross-section happensNONMET to be smaller at a certain place , then the forces are larger there than at the neighbouring cross-sections , so the beam will be further constricted , etc. , leadingMET to the so-called sausage instability ( Fig. 3.3(a) ) .
If the magnetic field happensNONMET to be larger at one side than at the other side , then the beam will be deflectedNONMET towards the weaker field which makesMET the field even weaker , etc. , leadingMET to the so-called kink instability ( Fig. 3.3(b) ) .
The positive particle is immobile In practice this meansNONMET that the positive ions are part of the crystal lattice .
There is then no magnetic force on the ions , only on the electrons .
So the electrons wantMET to moveNONMET inwards but can not because the ions holdMET them back by virtue of their electrostatic attraction .
Naturally , if the ions attractNONMET the electrons the converse is true as well , i.e. owing to the magnetic force on the electrons , there is also an inward force upon the ions .
So the whole crystal structure triesMET to contractNONMET or in other words the material is under pressure ( seeNONMET Example 3.2 ) .
In any practical situation this pressure is small and can be neglectedNONMET when calculatingNONMET the forces on current- carrying conductors .
3.4 .
Flow patterns and Ohm's law ( J , E , D ) Up to now we have not enquiredNONMET into the question of how the current aroseMET .
We just assumedMET that certain charge carriers moved with certain velocities .
Now we shall sayMET that in a class of materials the current density at any point is proportional to the electric field ; in mathematical form [formula , where [formula is the conductivity of the material .
The above equation is spite of its utmost simplicity representsNONMET an extremely good guess .
It is valid for nearly all materials up to quite high electric fields .
Will there be a magnetic field ?
Yes , of course , whenever there is a current there is a magnetic field as well .
But the effect of the magnetic field upon the motion of the electrons is nearly always negligible ( one exception causingNONMET the pinch effect is mentionedNONMET in the previous section ) .
Thus we may safely ignoreNONMET the magnetic field when determiningMET the lines of current flow .
We are then left with only one equation [formula or [formula or [formula , depending on our preference .
Eqn ( 3.38 ) tellsMET us that there is some analogy ( seeNONMET Example 3.3 ) with the electrostatic case treatedNONMET in Chapter 2 .
We may , in fact , reinterpretNONMET any of the diagrams of Figs ( 2.25 ) -(2.31) by assumingMET that the whole space is filledNONMET with a material of conductivity [formula and the field lines are now the lines of current flow as well .
Is the analogy perfect ?
Not really , because ( 1 ) as current flows there is some potential drop in the electrode itself , ( 2 ) zero conductivity for part of the space can not be electrostatically modelledNONMET since there are no dielectrics with Er = 0 , and ( 3 ) when current flows through two materials of different conductivity there is generally a surface charge at the boundary ( seeNONMET Example 3.4 ) .
It is not worth discussingNONMET any of these complications because one is rarely calledMET upon to work out lines of current in a conductor .
We shall rather returnMET to a very simple geometrical configuration for derivingMET Ohm's law .
We shall takeNONMET a piece of cylindrical material of length l and cross-section S and applyMET a voltage between the ends .
The electric field is then [formula , the current density [formula , and the current [formula .
From circuit theory [formula , where R is the resistance of the material .
ComparingNONMET eqns ( 3.41 ) and ( 3.42 ) we getMET [formula .
Since [formula is by definition the resistivity we getMET the result you learnedNONMET in school that the electrical resistance is proportional to the resistivity and the length of the sample and inversely proportional to its cross-section .
A more general definition of resistance valid for varying cross-sections may be easily arrivedMET at , but it is hardly worth the trouble .
The essential thing is that the relation [formula is equivalent to Ohm's law .
RiskingMET the dismay of circuit engineers some theoreticians do , in fact , referMET to eqn ( 3.35 ) as Ohm's law .
PROLOGUE Post-Impressionism : Royal Academy of Arts , London 1980 He signedNONMET the Friends ' Book in his elegant handwriting : Alexander Wedderburn , January 22nd , 1980 .
She had saidNONMET , peremptory as always , that he was to goNONMET straight to Room III , where " the miraculous stuff " was to be foundNONMET .
Early .
So here he was , a distinguished public man , also an artist of a kind , steppingNONMET obediently through Room I ( French 1880s ) and Room II ( British 1880s and 1890s ) , on a lead grey morning , to the pale grey , classical , quiet place where the bright light shoneNONMET and sangMET off pigment so that the phrase , miraculous stuff , seemedNONMET merely accurate .
On one long wall hungNONMET a row of Van Goghs , including an Arles " Poets ' Garden " he hadn't seenNONMET before , but recognised , from small photographs , from charged descriptions in the painter's letters .
He satNONMET down and sawNONMET a bifurcated path , simmering with gold heat round and under the rising , spreading blue-black-green down- pointing vanes of a great pine , still widening where the frame interruptedNONMET its soaring .
Two decorous figures advanced  , hand-in-hand , under its suspended thickness .
And beyond , green grass and geraniums like splashes of blood .
Alexander was not worried about whether Frederica would turn up .
She was no longer in the habit of being late : her life had schooledMET her to temporal accuracy , perhaps to being considerate .
He himself , at sixty-two , feltMET , not quite accurately , that he was now too old , too settled , to be putMET out , by her or by anyone else .
He thoughtNONMET with warmth of her certain approach .
There had been a pattern , an only too discernible repetition in the events and relationships of his life into which she had ruggedly refusedNONMET to fitMET .
She had been a nuisance , a threat , a torment and was now a friend .
She had suggestedNONMET that they lookNONMET at Van Gogh together , settingMET up another form of repetition , deliberateNONMET , contrived and aesthetic .
His play , The Yellow Chair , had first been presentedMET in 1957 ; he did not likeNONMET to thinkNONMET too closely about it , as he did not likeNONMET to thinkNONMET too closely about any of his past work .
He staredNONMET at the serenely impassioned garden made out of a whirl of yellow brushstrokes , a viridian impasto , a dense mass of furiously feathered lines of blue-green , isolated black pot hooks , the painfully clear orange-red spattering .
He had trouble findingMET an appropriate language for the painter's obsession with the illuminated material world .
He would have been lyingNONMET if he had recordedNONMET only the more accessible drama of the painter's electric quarrels with Gauguin in the Yellow House in Arles , the distant necessary brother who suppliedNONMET paint and love , the severed ear delivered to the whore in the brothel , the asylum fears .
At first he had thoughtNONMET that he could writeNONMET a plain , exact verse with no figurative language , in which a yellow chair was the thing itself , a yellow chair , as a round gold apple was an apple or a sunflower a sunflower .
Sometimes he still sawMET the brushstrokes , as it were , in this naked way , so that his earlier thoughts of this garden had to be undoneMET , the idea of black wings to be strippedMET from the painted leafage , the vulgar idea of blood splashes washed off the notation of geraniums .
But it couldn't be done .
Language was against him , for a start .
Metaphor layMET coiled in the name sunflower , which not only  turnedNONMET towards but resembledNONMET the sun , the source of light .
Van Gogh's idea of things had also been against him .
The yellow chair , besides being brushstrokes and pigment , besides being a yellow chair , was one of twelve bought for a company of artists who were to inhabitNONMET the Yellow House , the white walls of which should blazeMET with sunflowers as the windows of Gothic cathedrals blazedMET with coloured light .
Not only metaphor : cultural motif , immanent religion , a faith and a church .
One thing always linkedMET to another thing .
As the Poets ' Garden , a decoration for the bedroom of the " poet Gauguin " was more than it seemedNONMET .
Some time ago I readNONMET an article on Dante , Petrarch , Boccaccio and Botticelli .
Good Lord !
it did makeMET an impression on me , readingNONMET the letters of those men .
Arles , 1888 .
And Petrarch livedNONMET quite near here in Avignon , and I am seeingNONMET the same cypresses and oleanders … There is still a great deal of Greece all through the Tartarin and Daumier part of this queer country , where the good folks have the accent you knowNONMET ; there is a Venus of Arles just as there is a Venus of Lesbos and one still feelsMET the youth of it , in spite of all … But isn't it true , this garden has a fantastic character which makesMET you quite able to imagineNONMET the poets of the Renaissance strollingNONMET among these bushes and over the flowery grass ?
… The youth of it , Alexander thoughtNONMET .
I thoughtNONMET I was world-weary then .
In July 1890 , two years after writingNONMET this , Van Gogh had shotNONMET himself inefficiently in the groin , and had diedNONMET slowly .
In 1954 Alexander , a time-obsessed man , had readNONMET the centenary edition ( 1953 ) of the Letters .
He had himself been risingMET thirty-seven and when The Yellow Chair was putMET on had passedMET that age , was older now than Van Gogh , as he had , in the 1940s , realisedNONMET that he was older than Keats .
He had feltMET , perhaps ,  briefly , the power of the survivor .
What nonsense .
The eternal youth of Provence .
He thoughtNONMET of thick , fat , hot motorways carvingMET up that land .
He turnedMET his attention to the timeless fields of wheat and olives .
She madeMET a kind of progress up the Palladian marble stair .
A painter stopped to kissNONMET her : a journalist waved .
John House , who had organisedNONMET the exhibition , cameNONMET almost leapingNONMET down the stairs accompaniedNONMET by a smallish woman in a pine-green tent -like coat .
He also kissedNONMET Frederica and introducedNONMET the woman , fumblingMET her name , as " a colleague " and Frederica as " Frederica — you must forgiveNONMET me , I never knowNONMET what name you re workingNONMET under , women these days are so protean .
" Frederica did not attemptNONMET to ascertainNONMET the fumbled name , having givenNONMET  up interest in stray new people until it was clear that they were of real concern .
She assumedMET wrongly that John House's colleague was an art historian .
The colleague lookedNONMET at Frederica with an apparently absent-minded scanning attention .
John House spokeNONMET of the history of the gathering of the images , an emptiness  here Jacob wrestling the Angel ) , an unexpected  illumination  there .
Frederica listenedNONMET attentively ; went on and signedNONMET the Visitors ' Book .
Frederica Potter , Radio 3 Critics ' Forum .
She negotiatedMET a free catalogue .
She madeMET her leisurely way towards where she had toldNONMET Alexander to be .
An old woman , armed with a Sound Guide , becameNONMET quite excited and pulled at the arm of another .
" Hey — look at that — Winston Churchill paintedNONMET that , the … " — carefully — " Cap d'Antibes .
" Frederica dippedMET round her to stareNONMET : Claude Monet : " Au Cap d'Antibes par vent de mistral " .
A  whirl of blue and roseNONMET , for in less formed plungings of water and wind .
" To paintNONMET , " she rememberedNONMET from Proust's description of fictive Elstir , " that one does not seeNONMET what one seesNONMET .
" To paintNONMET light and air between ourselves and objects .
" I saidNONMET , dear , Winston Churchill — " The second woman tuggedNONMET free of the clutching fingers .
" Not to be mentionedNONMET in the same breath with … " she saidNONMET , lookingNONMET nervously from Frederica to painted signature .
The arrested water shoneMET and dancedMET .
In the catalogue John House quotedNONMET Monet's description of the painted light around the snowy haystacks as an enveloping veil .
He also quotedNONMET Mallarmé " I thinkNONMET … that there should be only allusion … To nameNONMET an object is to suppressMET three-quarters of the enjoyment of the poem , which is createdNONMET by  the gradual pleasure of apprehendingMET it .
To suggestMET it , that is the dream .
" It was not a view of things with which Frederica was entirely in sympathy : she likedNONMET namingNONMET names .
But she lookedNONMET briefly down , dazzledMET by the flowing skin of worked and delicate colour ; the blue and rose tourbillons of the mistral on the sea , the prismatically sliced frosty nimbus round the mysterious squat stacks .
She scribbledNONMET words , notes , in the margin of her catalogue .
Daniel boughtNONMET a ticket , and paid for the hire of a catalogue , he wasn't sure why .
He had comeNONMET , he believedNONMET , because he neededNONMET to discussNONMET certain administrative problems with Frederica .
He was aware that she believedNONMET he was in need of art .
Under his arm he carriedNONMET a folded newspaper with that day's headline : PEACE MOTHER DIESNONMET .
He was raw to bad news , more raw as he  grewNONMET older , which was not perhaps quite what he had expectedNONMET .
He sawNONMET and did not seeNONMET the paintings .
There was a field of poppies and corn which remindedMET him only of small and large , faded and ghostly versions of Van Gogh's " Harvest " which he had seenNONMET repeatedMET in endless hospital corridors , waiting rooms , school offices .
He had seenNONMET these ample fields , as he had seenNONMET Cezanne's geometric brown and green undergrowth in more than one mental hospital day room .
Odd , he thoughtNONMET , considering Van Gogh himself had diedNONMET mad and despairing in such surroundings .
Not serene , overexcitedMET , these fields .
Daniel's patience with the nervously ill was not what it had been .
Although he was fourteen years younger than Alexander , Daniel too was in the habit of thinking of himself as a survivor , a battered and grizzled survivor .
Alexander sawNONMET her comingNONMET towards him .
A dozen or so schoolgirls were dutifully fillingNONMET in xeroxed , hand-written , one-word-answerable questionnaires .
Alexander , always a connoisseur of garments , realisedNONMET that Frederica had changedMET her style , that the clothes the young creatures were wearingNONMET could be describedNONMET as a parody of the clothes Frederica had wornNONMET at their age , and that Frederica's new style was not unrelated to this shift .
There she was in a conventional two-piece suit , fine dark wool , muted geometrical pattern in greens and unexpected straw browns , caughtMET in at the waist — still very thin — to giveMET the effect of a bustle , the skirt long and straight to the knee .
She had ruffles ( not swashbucklingNONMET ) at the neck and the small velvet hat could , but did not , supportNONMET a veil .
The pale red hair was in a figure of eight chignon in her neck , reminiscent of one of Toulouse-Lautrec's fine-drawn cafe habituées .
Fifties and post-impressionist , thoughtNONMET Alexander , connecting .
She cameMET up and kissedNONMET him .
He remarkedNONMET on the parody .
She tookMET the point eagerly .
" My dear , I knowNONMET .
Pencil skirts and batwing sweaters and spiky stilettos , totteringNONMET with their hard little behinds sticking out , and all that red lipstick .
I rememberNONMET when I thoughtNONMET lipstick had goneMET forever , a dream of painted excess , as I thoughtNONMET paper taffeta had goneMET forever , in Cambridge , when we all tookMET to glazed cotton .
Do you rememberNONMET ?
" " Of course .
" " Do you rememberNONMET the eclectic Sixties parodies — when we wentNONMET to the National Portrait Gallery — everything , from swamis to major-generals and major-domos too .
These are such a serious and uniform parody .
More and more of the same .
More of me .
" " Lèse-majesté .
And you ?
You have revertedNONMET to type ?
" " Oh , I'm in my element .
I understandNONMET the Fifties .
I couldn't do the Forties bitMET at all , padded shoulders and crêpy things , ugh , and pageboys — I thinkNONMET it must have been purely Oedipal , those were my parents ' things , dammit , what I was gettingMET away from .
This is my scene .
" " So it is .
" " And now I have money .
" " In our new austerity , you have money .
" " In our new austerity , I am old enough to have money .
" They sawNONMET Daniel advancing .
" Daniel doesn't changeMET , " saidNONMET Alexander .
" Sometimes I wishNONMET he did , " saidNONMET Frederica .
Daniel did not changeMET .
He woreNONMET the same black clothes — baggy corduroys , heavy sweater , working-man's jacket — that he had wornNONMET through the Sixties and Seventies .
Like many hirsute men he had thinnedNONMET a little on top where once his black fur had been extravagant , but he had a plentiful and prickling black beard , and his body was still compact and very heavy .
He lookedNONMET , in this setting , a little like some painter .
He salutedNONMET Frederica and Alexander with his rolled newspaper and saidNONMET that it was cold outside .
Frederica kissedNONMET him too , reflectingMET that he was dressedNONMET like a man who smelledNONMET dirty , but in fact didn't .
Alexander smelledNONMET , still , of Old Spice and a sort of agreeable toastiness .
His smooth brown hair was as thick as ever but shotMET now with needles of glittering silver .
" We must talkNONMET , " saidNONMET Daniel .
" First you must lookNONMET at the pictures .
TakeMET time off .
" " I keepNONMET tryingNONMET .
I wentNONMET to the King's Carol Service .
" " Good for you .
" Frederica glancedNONMET shrewdly at him .
" Now , look at the pictures .
" Gauguin's " Man with the Axe " .
" One for you , " saidNONMET Frederica to Alexander , still skimmingMET the necessary accompanying print .
" Androgynous .
John House saysNONMET .
No , Gauguin saidNONMET .
Do you thinkNONMET ?
" Alexander consideredMET the decorative gold body , itself a repetition of a body on the Parthenon frieze .
He sawNONMET a blue loincloth , flat breasts , purple sea with coral tracings lyingMET flatly on it .
He was unmoved , though the colours were rich and strange .
He toldNONMET Frederica he preferredNONMET his androgynes to be more obscured , more veiled , more suggested , and directedMET her attention to " Still-Life , Fete Gloanec 1888 " in which various inanimate objects , two ripe pears , a dense bunch of flowers , swamMET across a bright red table-top rimmedNONMET with a black ellipse .
The picture was signedNONMET " Madeleine Bernard " , and Alexander toldNONMET Frederica that Gauguin had flirtedNONMET seriously with that young woman , had characterisedNONMET her , as was fashionable at the time , as having the desirable , unattainable androgynous perfection , complete sensuality combinedMET with unattainable self-sufficiency .
Frederica informedNONMET him from the catalogue that the vegetation was supposed to be a jocular portrait by Gauguin of Madeleine ,  the pears  her breasts ,  the dense flowers  her hair .
" You could readMET it another way , " saidNONMET Alexander , interested now , " you could readMET the pears as androgynous in themselves , as partly male .
" " And the hair as other hair , " saidNONMET Frederica loudly , scandalisingNONMET a few bystanders , amusingNONMET a few more .
" You likeNONMET to cork for your images , don't you , Alexander ?
" " It's age , " saidNONMET Alexander , peaceably , untruthfully .
They were beginningNONMET to attractMET a penumbra of gallery-goers , as though they were offeringNONMET a guided tour .
They moved on to the " Olive Pickers " .
Daniel's mind was elsewhere .
He rememberedNONMET a straight mass of red -gold hair , in cold King's Chapel , more golden than foxy Frederica's , slowly settlingMET onto a collar as the pins released their grip .
He sawMET a mass of freckles — sometimes meldingMET into sixpenny-sized brown patches of warmth — movingMET over the hard frame of cheekbones and brow .
The sexless voices roseMET in the cold .
" Unto us a Boy is bornNONMET .
" " Herod then with wrath was filledMET .
" The voices playedMET with the slaughter of the innocents , treble and descant hunting each other , while she bowedNONMET her head , unable to singNONMET in tune .
The olives had been paintedNONMET from the asylum at St Rémy in 1889 .
As for me , I tellNONMET you as a friend , I feelMET impotent when confrontedMET with such nature , for my Northern brains were oppressedMET by a nightmare in those peaceful spots as I feltMET one ought to do better things with the foliage .
Yet I did not wantNONMET to leaveMET things alone entirely , without makingMET an effort , but it is restrictedMET to the expression of two things — the cypresses — the olive trees — letNONMET others who are better and more powerful than I revealMET their symbolic language … LookMET here , there is another question that comesMET to mind .
Who are the human beings that actually liveNONMET among the olive , the orange , the lemon orchards ?
Frederica and Alexander heldMET a discussion of natural supernaturalism .
Daniel lookedNONMET at the pink sky , the twisted trunks , the silvery leaves , the rhythmic earth streaked with yellow ochre , with pink , with pale blue , with red-brown .
Olives , Frederica agreedNONMET with Alexander , could not recallMET the Mount of Olives , the Garden of Gethsemane , in the day of Van Gogh the pastor's son , the lay preacher .
As the cypresses must always , differently , mean death .
Daniel askedNONMET , for politeness really , why Van Gogh had been mad , was it just that he was driven ?
Alexander saidNONMET that it may have been a form of epilepsy , exacerbatedNONMET by the atmospheric-electric disturbances of the mistral and the heat .
Or you could makeMET a Freudian explanation .
He feltMET guilty towards the child who had not survivedNONMET , for whom he had been namedNONMET .
He had been bornNONMET on March 30th 1853 .
His dead brother , Vincent Van Gogh , had been bornNONMET on March 30th 1852 .
He was in flight from his family , his dead alter ego , his uncertain sense of identity .
He wroteNONMET to Theo , " I hopeNONMET you are not a " Van Gogh " .
Essentially I am not a " Van Gogh " .
I have always lookedMET upon you as Theo Daniel saidNONMET he could not seeMET the pain Frederica saidNONMET was in the olives , and Alexander , still lecturing , saidNONMET that Vincent had objectedNONMET to paintings of symbolic Christs in Gethsemane by Bernard and his compères , had torn up his own , had madeMET do with the olives themselves .
He toldNONMET Daniel about the terrible St Rémy painting of the blasted tree , about noir-rouge , and Daniel saidNONMET that it was odd that these orchards should be all over the walls of other asylums now , to cheer people up .
The trees stoodMET under their haloes of pink and green strokes , small flying things , solidifiedNONMET light movements or saccades of the eye , brushstrokes , pigment .
Here is a description of a canvas which is in front of me at the moment .
A view of the park of the asylum where I am stayingNONMET ;  on the right a grey terrace and a side wall of the house .
Some deflowered rose bushes , on the left a stretch of the park — red-ochre — the soil scorchedNONMET by the sun , covered with fallen pine needles   .
This edge of the park is plantedNONMET with large pine-trees , whose trunks and branches are red-ochre , the foliage green gloomedNONMET over by an admixture of black .
These high trees stand out against an evening sky with violet stripes on a yellow ground , which higher up turns into pink , into green .
A wall — also red-ochre — shutsMET off the view , and is toppedNONMET only by a violet and yellow-ochre hill .
Now the nearest tree is an enormous trunk , struckMET by lightning and sawed-off .
But one side branch shoots up very high and letsNONMET fallNONMET an avalanche of dark green pine    needles .
This sombre giant — like a defeated proud man — contrasts , when consideredMET in the nature of a living creature , with the pale smile of a last rose on the fading bush in front of him … To Emile Barnard , St Rémy , December 1889 .
You will realise that this combination of red-ochre , of green gloomedNONMET over by grey , the black streaks surroundingNONMET the contours , producesMET something of the sensation of anguish , calledNONMET " noir-rouge " from which certain of my companions in misfortune frequently sufferNONMET I am tellingNONMET you about this … to remindNONMET you that one can tryNONMET to giveMET an impression of anguish without aimingMET straight at the historic Garden of Gethsemane Daniel thoughtNONMET about dead Ann Maguire who , like Anna Van Gogh , the Dutch pastor's wife , had namedNONMET a younger , hopeful child for a dead one .
( Though in Van Gogh's case , the names , Theodorus , Vincent , Vincent , Theodorus , appearedMET and reappearedMET from generation to generation , the cultural parallels to certain persisting aspects of the family face , a heavy brow , an intense blue eye , a cheek bone , a nostril .
) In the churchyard in his last parish a family in the English 1870s had triedMET to nameMET a son Walter Cornelius Brittain and had buriedMET three , aged five , aged two , aged one month , interspersedNONMET by variegated dead daughters , a Jennet , a Marian , an Eva .
In August 1976 a car , containingNONMET an IRA gunman , possibly already dead , ploughedMET onto a pavement and killedMET three of Mrs Maguire's children , Joanne , eight , John , two , Andrew , six weeks , leavingMET one son , Mark , aged seven .
People had been shocked , by  numbers as well as by gratuitous death itself , as people will be , and Mrs Maguire's sister and a friend had foundedNONMET the Peace People , whose brave beginning and sad end will not be chronicledNONMET here .
Ann Maguire had borne a second Joanne , in New Zealand , from where she had returnedNONMET , unable to bearMET cultural transplantation .
Although the papers referred to her as the Peace Mother she had not been active in the Peace People .
She had broughtMET a case for legal compensation for her dead children's lives and for her own suffering and one of her few recorded public utterances was to callNONMET the first offer of compensation " pitiful " .
The day of the hearing of her second case she had been foundNONMET dead .
Daniel had piecedMET the story together from the radio : " with throat wounds .
Foul play was not suspected , " and from conflicting newspapers .
" With hedge-cutters " .
" With a carving knife " .
" With an electric carving-knife " " by her side " .
Her motives , the coroner was to sayNONMET , were " not completely easy to understandNONMET " .
Daniel , who had becomeNONMET a specialist in wild blows of chance , thoughtNONMET he understoodNONMET some of it .
He had not prayedNONMET for Ann Maguire .
He was not that kind of priest .
He had metaphorically shakenMET a large fist , impotently , at some looming energy -field , and got on with his work , his work .
He followedNONMET the other two into the dark shadows of the room housingMET the Low Countries .
Nuns ascended and descendedNONMET a cool grey stair in winged white caps .
The Lauriergracht in Amsterdam was gloomed and glittering .
Mondriaan's " Evening " was sombre and cloudy .
He likedNONMET these .
Like Vincent , although he was unaware that Vincent had remarkedNONMET on it , he had " Northern brains " and respondedMET biologically and spiritually to tones of black , donkey-brown , varied greys , touches of white in dark .
" One of the most beautiful things done by the painters of this country has been the painting of black which nevertheless has light in it , " Vincent had writtenNONMET from Holland .
Xavier Mellery , the painter of the nuns , was describedNONMET in the catalogue as " creatingNONMET a light which is the negation of that which envelopsMET our immediate visual experience of things ; it is rather the Interior light of your mind … " Daniel was used to such language ; it was his daily , or anyway weekly , pabulum .
He knewNONMET about the light shining in darkness , and had comeMET , for reasons completely different from Alexander's desire for exactness , specificity , to mistrustNONMET figurative language .
He never now madeMET a sermon from a metaphor , nor drewMET analogies : he preachedNONMET examples , cases , lessons .
But he likedNONMET the black Dutch paintings : they were , so to speakNONMET , on his wavelength .
He corneredMET Frederica .
" You saidNONMET you'd news of Will .
" " A postcard , yes .
" " Where this time ?
" " Kenya .
On the way to the Ugandan famine , I thinkNONMET .
" " Hippie , " saidNONMET Daniel .
" Helping out , " saidNONMET Frederica .
" What use — comparatively — is a chap like that , wi' no training , no medical … no … ?
Another mouth to feedNONMET .
It makesMET me wild .
" " I thinkNONMET he is often useful , in his way .
You judgeMET him so " " He judgesMET me .
JudgingMET runs in the family .
" " It does , " saidNONMET Frederica .
" Once , " saidNONMET Daniel , " I was in Charing Cross Hospital , someone's kid had takenNONMET an overdose and diedNONMET , they pump them out there regular as clockwork but this one's liver couldn't takeMET any more .
Anyway , there I was , goingNONMET up this endless corridor , thinkingNONMET what to do about the mother , who blamedNONMET herself — wi' reason mind you , she was one of those soft suckering witch- , but that madeMET it worse , not better — and there was th' trolley wi' the dead girl on it , slidingNONMET by me — sheet right over , porters in those soft theatre boots and floppy plastic bathcaps — and when they'd gotNONMET past me and were turningNONMET in't door , the first one looked at me from under his plastic frills like , with my  own face .
I was shocked for a minute .
Got all his hair tuckedNONMET up in that thing , you seeMET — otherwise , he's not so like me , not strikingly so .
" Hi , " he saidNONMET .
" GoingMET about your father's business , are you ?
" So I askedNONMET him what he was up to and he saidNONMET he was goingNONMET to and fro in the earth and walkingNONMET up and down in it , and then he pushedNONMET th " trolley in , and I wentNONMET in after , and the mother beganNONMET her howling and shrieking , and Will saidNONMET , " Well , I'll walk off and leaveNONMET you to it .
" And I saidNONMET , " Where are you goingNONMET , then ?
" And he saidNONMET , " I toldNONMET you .
To and fro .
" That was the last I sawNONMET of Will .
" The nuns ascendedNONMET the stairs in a perpetual cool silence .
" QuotingNONMET scripture for his own purposes , " saidNONMET Daniel .
" That was rather funny , I thoughtNONMET , " saidNONMET Frederica .
" Anything on the postcard about comingNONMET back ?
Any plans ?
" " No .
" Sometimes she wishedNONMET Will would not writeNONMET to her at all , if he would sendNONMET no messages to Daniel .
Sometimes she toldNONMET herself the postcards , or exercise book scrawls , were messages to Daniel , but one should never , she consideredMET , ignoreNONMET surface meanings in favour of implications and the damned things were addressedNONMET to her , to Frederica .
" Oh hell , " she saidNONMET .
" Not to worryNONMET , " saidNONMET Daniel .
" I'll pushMET off .
I'll seeNONMET you .
" " You haven't seenNONMET the pictures .
" " I'm not in the mood .
" " We were goingNONMET to  have coffee in Fortnum and Mason's .
" " No , thankNONMET you all the same .
" WEDNESDAY , 12 JANUARY 1966 Clare still swappedMET one night a week off with Stephanie and reportedNONMET subsequent events to Gilda , who now managedNONMET the shoe shop : occasionally she visitedNONMET Clare for an evening meal .
As Clare pouredNONMET sherry , Gilda askedNONMET , ‘ So how was the BOAC pilot ?
’ ‘ Tony was the worst yet .
’ Clare never feltMET embarrassed discussingNONMET sex with Gilda , who could talkNONMET about little else .
‘ He'd readNONMET all the sex manuals ever printed .
Whipped a porn magazine out of his flight case after the first gin and tonic .
He was coldly determined to be a good lover .
For me , that was a total turn-off .
’ ‘ PornNONMET pictures are a turn-off to most women .
Women like words , not pictures , ’ Gilda saidNONMET as she sippedNONMET her drink .
‘ But I'm startingNONMET to thinkNONMET that everything's a turn-off for you , doll .
You clearly can't have sex with fellas you ain't fond of .
I expectNONMET you needNONMET a chap you knowNONMET well , someone you feelMET comfortable with , not these one-nighters .
’ She swallowedNONMET half the glass .
‘ Now me , I'm the reverse .
If I don't giveMET a damn about ‘ em , I ain't anxious , and if I ain't anxious , then I comeMET easy .
’ She drained her glass .
‘ When Tony couldn't getMET me to climaxMET , he wantedNONMET to askNONMET another girl over , ’ Clare saidNONMET .
‘ He automatically assumedMET that I was a lesbian .
’ ‘ That's not what he meantNONMET , ’ Gilda saidNONMET .
‘ Lots of guys findMET it a turn-on to watchNONMET two women makingMET love .
’ ‘ How very odd .
Can you imagineNONMET a woman tryingNONMET to getNONMET two men into bed so she could watchNONMET them ?
’ ‘ ForgetNONMET this guy , ’ saidNONMET Gilda .
‘ I knowNONMET what you needNONMET , Clare : someone you knowNONMET and trust , someone who won't makeMET you feelMET anxious .
Then you'll relaxNONMET and it'll happenNONMET — then you'll stopNONMET being one of them miserable nymphos who hopMET from man to man , hopingNONMET for Mr Right , the man who can satisfyNONMET her .
’ As Gilda held out her glass to be refilledNONMET , she addedMET reflectively , ‘ Although you seemNONMET more lonely than horny .
Are you lookingMET for sex , or just someone to talkNONMET to ?
You ain't likely to pickMET up Prince Charming in a bar .
’ Clare saidNONMET , ‘ I'm not lookingMET for Prince Charming .
I don't wantNONMET the disorder , the pain , the mess , or the misery of being in love .
I just wantNONMET a short-term relationship , without responsibility .
’ Gilda laughedNONMET .
‘ So do these fellas you pickMET up .
But I'm not convinced that's right for you .
You needNONMET a secure situation with someone you can trustNONMET , who you knowNONMET will stick around because he lovesNONMET you .
I'll tellNONMET you who you ought to fallMET in love with , Clare .
’ ‘ Who ?
’ ‘ Yourself .
You clearly thinkNONMET that you're a piece of worthless rubbish , and if I pickMET up those vibes , then so do the blokes .
Why not giveMET sex a rest for a bit , and payMET a bit of attention to yourself ?
You never wantNONMET to makeMET a man the centre of your existence .
That place is for you , Clare .
’ ‘ I am the centre of my existence , ’ Clare sangNONMET , as if chanting a psalm , pitchingMET her voice an octave lower , as she pushedNONMET Josh to her playgroup the next morning .
A man stoodNONMET on the porch , his hands in the pocket of his beige mackintosh .
‘ Good morning .
Are you a prospective parent ?
’ Clare askedNONMET .
She feltNONMET in her pocket for the key .
‘ No. ’ saidNONMET the man .
I'm an inspector for the local education authority .
’ After examiningNONMET the bathroom , the inspector pointedMET out that legally one toilet was requiredNONMET for every seven kiddies .
Clare saidNONMET , ‘ But if each child goesNONMET there every two and a half hours , one lavatory is adequate .
There is a potty for emergencies .
We have never had a problem .
’ The inspector was not listening .
He was makingNONMET notes on other violations .
Half an hour after the inspector left , as if to proveNONMET his point , the lavatory refused to flushNONMET .
The following morning , Clare's playgroup was orderedNONMET to closeMET .
Two days later , Clare's mind was unexpectedly divertedMET from her personal problems — no job , no man — when the CND office telephonedMET to askNONMET her for voluntary evening help : they were organizingNONMET another protest after a nuclear accident .
Over Spain , an American B-52 bomber carryingMET an H-bomb had collidedNONMET in mid-air with another aircraft .
The H-bomb , with an explosive capacity of more than a million tons of TNT , had fallenNONMET into the Atlantic Ocean off southern Spain .
Clare feltMET cheeredMET to be back among like-minded people , doing something worth while .
MONDAY , 14 FEBRUARY 1966 Valentine's Day broughtMET two happy events .
The radio reportedMET that the missing H-bomb had been locatedNONMET on the Atlantic seabed .
And to Clare's delight , she soldNONMET the lease of the apartment in which she ranMET her playgroup — for a profit of twenty-three per cent .
Clare feltMET as if she had wonNONMET a sweepstake .
On the following morning , she boughtNONMET a portable TV , a warm winter coat for herself , and new clothes for Josh .
She didn't buyNONMET any toys for Josh because she had decidedNONMET to openMET a toy shop .
Two weeks later , Clare boughtNONMET the short lease of a small shop in the Pimlico Road , close to Mrs Gooden's home .
Though there was a lot to do , Clare , busyNONMET redecoratingNONMET the shop and visiting wholesalers to buyNONMET stock , still managedMET to workNONMET one evening a week for the Movement .
In mid-April , just before her toy shop openedMET , Clare's weary , amiable , National Health doctor looked up from his desk and saidNONMET , ‘ About your vaginal symptoms , Mrs Shapiro .
You'd better goNONMET to St Stephen's for tests : they're properly equippedNONMET to handleMET this sort of thing .
’ He seemedNONMET uneasy .
‘ What sort of thing ?
… Not … cancer ?
’ ‘ No , gonorrhoea , ’ the doctor saidNONMET apologetically .
Clare almost faintedNONMET from surprise and anxiety , horror and shame .
Then she weptNONMET .
The doctor refused to giveNONMET her more sleeping tablets but scribbledNONMET a prescription for tranquillizers , which were increasingly prescribed for women like Clare , with symptoms of anxiety in stressful situations such as poverty , divorce , or bereavement ; women with marital problems and women who were out of work also found them helpful , although the pills did nothing to resolveNONMET the problem responsible for the initial anxiety .
Clare , who blushedNONMET with shame whenever she thoughtNONMET about it , waitedNONMET anxiously for the result of her tests at St Stephen's Hospital .
The tests were negative .
But within a month , she couldn't getMET through the day without tranquillizers ; she feltMET less anxious , calmer .
Clare managedNONMET to openMET the Red Rocking Horse by mid-May .
At the opening party , an excited three-and-a- half Josh rodeNONMET the pretty antique red rocking horse in the shop window .
MONDAY , 15 AUGUST 1966 Standing by the swimming pool at Saracen , Miranda beckonedNONMET to Adam , who was floatingNONMET on the water in a transparent blow-up plastic armchair .
In a voice of soft persuasion , she saidNONMET , ‘ Will you do something for me , Adam ?
I'm goingNONMET to learnNONMET to flyNONMET .
I wantNONMET you to breakMET the news gently to Gran .
’ ‘ But you promisedNONMET your grandmother not to learnNONMET to flyNONMET , ’ Adam objectedNONMET .
‘ It was a condition of her gift to you the ten thousand pounds ’ capital to startNONMET KITS .
’ I didn't sayNONMET for ever .
I'll payNONMET the money back to her .
’ Miranda was defiant .
‘ I've always wantedNONMET to flyNONMET .
I won't be heldMET by  a promise that was unfairly extractedMET from me before I legally becameNONMET an adult .
And I getNONMET bored with nothing to do on holiday but lieNONMET in the sun .
’ ‘ When are you startingNONMET ?
’ Adam askedNONMET , resigned .
‘ This morning , at the Cannes flying school .
They have English instructors .
Four hours of instruction a day for two weeks .
And of course , this time of year , it's perfect flying weather !
’ Miranda was triumphant now .
‘ I've already passedMET the two written exams .
Did law and meteorology last Easter , and now I've finishedNONMET navigation , radiotelephony , and technical — that was the toughest .
’ So that's why you're so pale .
’ Three hours later , two thousand feet above the Mediterranean , Miranda , alert and exultant , satNONMET next to her instructor at the controls of a trainer plane , an ugly little single-engine Rallye which her instructor described  as efficient and forgiving : you could do something wrong m a Rallye without gettingNONMET immediately punishedMET for it .
Flying was even better than she had hopedNONMET : better than skiing , better than drivingNONMET a sports car .
As the Rallye dronedNONMET towards the lighthouse on the tip of Cap Camerat , Miranda feltMET as if she were breathing the air of the gods .
Gently they swoopedNONMET , turnedNONMET , and climbedMET in the azure sky .
After they reachedMET two thousand feet , the instructor showedNONMET her how to flyNONMET level ; he then encouragedNONMET her to experimentNONMET with the stick , manoeuvringNONMET the plane m every direction .
Miranda feltMET that the aircraft was an extension of her arms and her fingertips , outspread in flight .
Heading west on the return flight path , the instructor saidNONMET , ‘ This is the first time I've flownNONMET with a pupil and haven't once neededNONMET to touchNONMET the controls .
’ Miranda pushedMET home this advantage .
‘ Then can I landNONMET ?
’ The instructor hesitatedNONMET , then saidNONMET , ‘ Why not ?
’ The girl was clearly a natural flyer .
After being given clearance to landNONMET , Miranda , followingMET her instructor's directions , startedNONMET her approach ; she throttled back to reduceMET speed and controlMET her descent as she flewNONMET towards the threshold — the point just before she intendedNONMET to touch down .
The plane was now movingMET at not much above stalling speed .
As the Rallye droppedNONMET to about thirty feet above the runway , Miranda throttled back completely and heldNONMET the stick back .
The plane seemedNONMET to glideNONMET forward and land itself .
The undemonstrative Miranda flungMET her arms around the instructor .
‘ Oh , thankNONMET you !
ThankNONMET you !
‘ Quite a smooth landing , ’ the instructor saidNONMET approvingly He hesitatedNONMET , then warned , ‘ Next time be careful not to landNONMET too fast or you'll runMET out two lexial units; [run out] = phrasal runway .
’ This woman was adventurous and ambitious : such pilots did not liveNONMET long .
He addedMET , ‘ Careful pilots are the ones that surviveNONMET .
A good pilot never takesMET a risk .
’ ‘ The opposite of a good businessman , ’ Miranda saidNONMET , still on a high .
‘ A businessman has to takeMET risks constantly — and win sixty per cent of the time .
’ ‘ In the air , that risk factor would killMET you .
’ Nine hundred years earlier , the great hall had been the hub of castle life : wolfhounds ateNONMET on floors strewnNONMET with rushes ; servants sleptNONMET on straw pallets thrownNONMET on the floor .
Then , the winter salon did not smellNONMET of lilies and expensive leather but of stale , fat , stinkingNONMET human bodies and animal ordure .
Elinor sometimes thought of all the love and the hatred , the treachery and the killing that this hall had undoubtedly seenMET , when strong men fought hand-to-hand to the death , to protectNONMET their women and children .
Now the winter salon at Saracen , where Elinor waitedNONMET for Adam , was not only the coolest but the most impressive room in the château .
High arched walls of pale , honey-coloured stone were hungNONMET with bluish-green tapestries ; around the big stone fireplace , where logs burnedNONMET in winter , stoodMET sofas covered in the blues and greens of the tapestries ; here and there were lamps , flowers , books , and piles of parlour games .
‘ What's keepingMET Adam ?
’ Elinor askedNONMET Buzz , who was adding up the Scrabble score .
‘ You saidNONMET three o'clock .
It's only two-thirty , ’ Buzz said .
‘ Ninety-three for you , two hundred and sixty-four for me .
That's not a bad score for you , Nell .
’ Buzz never cheatedNONMET to letNONMET Elinor winNONMET : she knewNONMET that Elinor would immediately senseNONMET this and feelMET humiliated .
After an intensive rehabilitation programme of physiotherapy and speech therapy , Elinor appearedNONMET to have completely recovered from her stroke , although she could no longer thinkNONMET of three things at once , which Buzz said was a mercy for the people who had to liveNONMET with her .
Elinor was sometimes at a loss for the right word , or name , and then becameNONMET impatient with herself ; she was often frustrated because she couldn't moveNONMET as swiftly as she did before .
At times , she was downhearted and wonderedNONMET whether she would ever writeNONMET another book .
‘ When you wantNONMET to writeNONMET , you'll writeNONMET , ’ Buzz would tellNONMET her then .
Now Buzz gruntedNONMET , ‘ Look what I toreNONMET out of the Daily Mail .
’ She dugMET into her pocket , unfoldedNONMET a bit of newspaper , and readNONMET , Sportsman Jim Clark today openedMET a splendidly equippedNONMET physical training college at Larkwood in Wiltshire , formerly the family home of the O'Dare family .
Lady O'Dare commentedNONMET , ‘ I wishNONMET them well .
’ ’ ‘ I doubtNONMET that .
’ Elinor peeredNONMET at the photograph of the new owner , a motor-racing hero , standingNONMET with her sister-in-law , Marjorie .
The doorbell sounded .
‘ I'll goNONMET , ’ Buzz said .
‘ It's either Adam or the postman .
’ Buzz returnedNONMET readingNONMET a postcard .
‘ It's for you , from Sonia Rushleigh … Whoops , I meanNONMET Bromley .
Who'd have thoughtNONMET them two would marryNONMET ?
She saysNONMET the Colonel's taken up petit point , and Miss Hawkins is teachingNONMET him .
RememberNONMET her , the schoolmistress ?
’ ‘ I do indeed , ’ saidNONMET Elinor .
‘ Frumpy sourpuss !
Who's the letter from ?
’ ‘ Clare .
’ Buzz heldNONMET the envelope out to Elinor .
Elinor shookNONMET her head .
‘ You openNONMET it .
’ ‘ It's marked personal .
’ ‘ I don't wantNONMET to readNONMET it , unless she apologizesNONMET .
’ Buzz openedNONMET the letter and readNONMET it .
She shookNONMET her head .
‘ It's just a friendly letter , askingMET how you are .
But readingNONMET between the lines , I thinkNONMET Clare needsNONMET money .
’ ‘ If she took her poor child back to his father and gaveMET her husband a second chance , she wouldn't needNONMET money .
’ ‘ How about a bit of generosity ?
’ Buzz said .
‘ You're a silly , stubborn old woman .
And Clare's just as stubborn and just as silly .
It wouldn't have hurtMET her to sayNONMET she was sorry .
’ Elinor lookedNONMET anxious .
‘ Do you really thinkNONMET she's short of money , Buzz ?
I wouldn't wantNONMET her to have a rough time .
’ This remark was overheardNONMET by Adam as , in pale blue shirt and jeans , he saunteredNONMET through the door .
He saidNONMET , ‘ Elinor , you allowedNONMET ample provision in the trust for helpingNONMET Clare — if the trustees considerMET that help is neededNONMET .
I'll checkNONMET on Clare when I get back to London .
’ He putNONMET a pile of papers on a side table .
‘ There's rather a lot of paperwork here , things that you should be aware of .
’ ‘ We've had more paperwork , not less , since the trust took over , ’ Buzz saidNONMET tartly .
‘ And I tellNONMET you frankly that I can't followMET it , Adam .
I thoughtNONMET the trustees were goingNONMET to manageNONMET the business .
Elinor shouldn't be madeMET to wadeMET though pages of paragraphs with no commas in ‘ em .
’ ‘ Of course the trustees manageNONMET the business , and they do it very well , ’ Adam saidNONMET .
‘ And there's no reason for Elinor to seeNONMET any of this if it tiresNONMET her .
In fact , I'm about to suggestNONMET something that would simplifyNONMET matters .
’ ‘ What's that ?
’ Buzz askedNONMET .
‘ I'd likeNONMET to substituteNONMET Paul Littlejohn for myself in the power of attorney that I holdMET on your behalf , Elinor .
I'm tryingNONMET to reduceMET the number of business administrators : the fewer there are , the simpler the system and the cheaper it will be .
’ ‘ Does that meanMET that Paul will be legally responsible for Elinor's affairs instead of you , Adam ?
’ ‘ Yes , but that's only a technicality .
Paul will do as I sayNONMET .
And I'd also likeNONMET you to signNONMET this document , Adam addedMET , ‘ which absolvesMET me and STG from any further responsibility once Paul Littlejohn has been substitutedNONMET .
’ Buzz said , ‘ But surely … ’ Smoothly Adam explainedNONMET , ‘ The responsibility must clearly restMET m only one area .
It's in your interests to clarifyMET the situation .
It's customary .
’ ‘ If you thinkNONMET that's best , Adam dear .
’ Elinor frownedNONMET slightly at Buzz .
Adam decidedNONMET to holdMET back Miranda's bombshell until later , after Elinor drankNONMET her evening glass of champagne .
Just before five o'clock , when the business session had endedNONMET and the afternoon was still hot , quiet , and heavy with languor , Buzz left to getNONMET some tea .
Adam escortedNONMET Elinor to the elevator ; after takingNONMET her to her bedroom , he intendedNONMET to goNONMET to the beach for a swim .
In the high-ceilinged kitchen , surroundedNONMET by the smells of mint and basil , Buzz whistledNONMET ‘ Roses of Picardy ’ with much dramatic warbling as she preparedNONMET Elinor's tea .
Leaves and yellow blossoms obscuredNONMET the top of the window , while the bottom was coveredNONMET by aggressive pink hollyhocks , seemingly determined to fightMET their way inside .
Sylvie , the cook , satNONMET at the big kitchen table by the window , writingNONMET a list and shooing pigeons away .
The bane of Sylvie's life was the pigeon droppings that litteredNONMET the windowsill and had to be cleaned up daily .
With a shudder , Sylvie refusedNONMET a cup of tea .
Still whistling , Buzz laid the tray .
The soporific calm of the drowsy afternoon was shatteredMET by the bell indicator above the kitchen door .
Someone was jabbingNONMET the bell — non-stop — in Elinor's bedroom .
KnowingNONMET that Adam was probably in the elevator on his way to the beach , Buzz hurledNONMET herself out of the kitchen and ranNONMET upstairs .
Frantically she toreMET open the door to Elinor's apartment .
In the passage , she stumbledNONMET and almost fellNONMET , then flung back the door to the bedroom .
To her relief , Elinor was not slumpedNONMET on the floor ; deathly white , she clungNONMET for support to the silver brocade hangings of her bed .
Wordlessly , she pointedNONMET above the fireplace .
Buzz turnedNONMET her head to the left , where the portrait of the three sisters hung .
At first Buzz saw nothing , but then she gaspedNONMET in horror .
Each of the three long , creamy necks had been cutNONMET horizontally : a small triangle of canvas hung downward from each slashed throat .
18 WEDNESDAY , 17 AUGUST 1966 In the foyer of the Clanrickard Club , Mike Grant leanedNONMET against the wall at the bottom of a double-sided curving staircase .
With his hands in the pockets of his dinner jacket , he surveyedMET the room .
It was goingNONMET to be a good night , in spite of the fact that it was August and a Wednesday .
MakingMET sure to appearNONMET casual , he carefully watchedNONMET the men in dinner jackets and the women in full-length décolleté dresses moveNONMET slowly over the red carpet towards the restaurant at the rear , or climbNONMET the staircase to the gaming rooms .
Mike noticedNONMET a group of heavy gamblers , most of them Greek , move towards the baccarat room , where the Sultan of Rupolei had been losingNONMET for the last hour .
His attention was also caughtMET by a woman dressedNONMET in midnight-blue satin and diamonds ; the sister of a Middle-Eastern ruler , she was knownNONMET as an audacious gambler .
He stiffenedNONMET as he recognizedNONMET a man move upstairs with a distinctive , boneless saunter : he had better sendNONMET someone up to checkNONMET the backgammon room .
The club owners , the casinos , and the multinational bookmakers knewMET which professional gamblers successfully played games that containedMET an element of skill — such as backgammon and poker- and they preferredNONMET to have nothing to do with them ; ideally , the house welcomedMET inexperienced , rich idiots .
‘ This is certainly a good night to playNONMET the odds .
’ Mike heardNONMET a sarcastic voiceNONMET from behind him .
He turnedNONMET and smiledNONMET at Adam .
‘ ComeNONMET into my office for a drink .
What's up ?
’ In Mike's office , furnished with heavily varnishedNONMET Victorian club furniture .
Adam shookNONMET his head curtly at the offer of a chair .
‘ I'm not stayingNONMET , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ I merely wantedNONMET to tellNONMET you that you've scaredNONMET the hell out of everyone at Saracen — except me .
So kindly curbNONMET your theatrical , James Bond streak .
I knewNONMET immediately what your message meantMET : ‘ If you don't pay up , one slash is all it takesMET .
’ ’ He glaredMET at his brother .
‘ I thoughtNONMET you were fond of Elinor .
I seemNONMET to recallMET that Elinor helpedNONMET you to buyNONMET your first good bike .
Why dragMET her into my problems ?
You might have givenMET her another stroke .
’ ‘ I don't knowNONMET what the hell you're talkingNONMET about , and I can't commentNONMET until I do .
’ Mike , his face alert and wary , litNONMET a cigarette .
Adam briefly describedNONMET how the triple portrait had been slashedNONMET and addedMET , ‘ D' you really expectNONMET me to believeNONMET that you had nothing to do with it ?
Someone toldNONMET some cat burglar where to findNONMET that picture !
’ Mike staredNONMET at his brother , then slowly saidNONMET , ‘ Not me .
I agreeNONMET , it's clearly a warning to payNONMET , but I swearNONMET I knowNONMET nothing about it .
It couldn't have been the brothers — they'd be even less subtle … ’ He inhaledNONMET deeply .
‘ Who else do you oweNONMET money , Adam , you stupid bastard ?
’ ‘ No one who'd do anything so bloody childish !
How do I stopNONMET this bloody nonsense ?
’ ‘ How many times must I tellNONMET you that if you letMET things goMET too far , nobody can stopNONMET what will undoubtedly happenNONMET ?
Adam , ’ Mike wentMET on quietly , ‘ you've always takenMET full advantage of anyone who's fond of you .
You thinkNONMET you can push me around because you've been doing that since we were in the nursery .
You also grew up watchingNONMET Grandfather's clients literally getMET away with murder .
’ He suckedNONMET on his cigarette , furiously threwNONMET it into the fireplace , shovedNONMET his hands in his pockets , and glaredMET at Adam .
‘ Do you wantNONMET to be foundNONMET washed up on the seashore with a few vital bits missing ?
Are you so anxious to knowNONMET what it feelsNONMET like to have both eyeballs gouged out , one at a time ?
Do you wantNONMET to be slowly batteredNONMET to death , before dyingNONMET in agony ?
’ ‘ Of course not , you bastard , ’ Adam saidNONMET .
‘ I only wantNONMET to knowNONMET who slashedNONMET that picture if you didn't .
’ ‘ Whoever they are — and only you knowNONMET that — these people are serious .
Punters often tryNONMET to avoidMET paying .
Examples often have to be madeMET .
You knowNONMET that .
’ Mike startedNONMET to strideNONMET up and down the room .
‘ TakeMET that fucking urbane look off your face and face reality , Adam .
If you loseMET money , that's tough .
But if you don't pay up , that's insanity .
’ ‘ I've had enough of your melodrama , ’ Adam snarledMET .
Mike glaredMET at his brother again .
‘ I'm not exaggeratingNONMET .
RememberNONMET that incident when the Sultan's sister had her Rolls stoppedNONMET , at two in the morning on the Grande Corniche , after leavingNONMET the casino ?
They blewMET away the chauffeur's head with a machine gun .
She wasn't touchedNONMET .
She paidNONMET all her gambling debts the very next day .
And when the story was carefully leakedMET to the newspapers , quite a lot of other debts were suddenly settled in full .
’ ‘ I'm not some goddamned sultan's sister .
’ ‘ No , but you also like playingMET with fire .
You never believeNONMET that the gods will really letNONMET it burnMET you .
You thinkNONMET you're omnipotent — but you aren't .
’ ‘ KeepMET your voice down , ’ Adam growledMET .
‘ I'll do what I bloody well likeNONMET in my own office , ’ Mike saidNONMET .
‘ Don't you understandNONMET ?
I'm on your side , Adam .
You're the only brother I have .
’ His voice deepened .
‘ I'm probably more worried about this than you are .
If anything happenedNONMET to you … I'd be leftMET without you .
So for God's sake , pay up , you stupid shit !
Don't thinkNONMET you can getMET away with it just because you've always gotMET away with everything , since you setMET that nursemaid's apron alightNONMET .
’ ‘ I thoughtNONMET you were too young to rememberNONMET that , ’ Adam saidNONMET uneasily .
He addedMET , ‘ She shouldn't have leftNONMET the matches within reach of a child .
’ ‘ She was in hospital for six weeks , and I was the only one who knewNONMET it wasn't an accident .
I knewNONMET you wantedNONMET to seeMET how far you could goMET .
’ ‘ Let's not argueNONMET about something that happenedNONMET over thirty years ago , ’ Adam saidNONMET finally .
‘ Can you raiseMET money to helpNONMET me fend them off ?
I promiseNONMET you .
within six months I knowNONMET I'll have no more money problems .
Never again .
’ ‘ You'll have money problems as long as you gambleNONMET , Adam .
Annabel was determinedNONMET to getMET a grip on herself and do as Scott advisedNONMET : rememberNONMET 1965 as the year she stoppedNONMET having to goNONMET to auditions and 1966 as the year in which she blossomedMET into a successful young New York hostess as she metNONMET Andy Warhol , Lenny Bernstein , Baby Jane Holzer , and all the other gossip-columnist fodder .
By July , Annabel was a Junior Friend of the Metropolitan Museum , a Friend of the Museum of Modern Art , and a patron of the Bronx Zoo .
She also allayedNONMET her insecurity with a massive spending spree ; each charity dinner requiredNONMET a new ballgown , and each new glittering friend — contacts for Scott — requiredNONMET a glittering party .
So the year thus far was a busy one .
The Long Road Home CIA HQ Langley Sorge had never been to Langley before .
It was not something a Russian expected to do .
It was after 9 a.m. when Nowak droveNONMET him through the gates , past the guards , and into the vast underground car-park .
‘ Why Langley ?
’ Sorge had askedNONMET him on the way out of Washington .
‘ They wantNONMET to showMET you that they trustNONMET you .
’ ‘ I don't expectNONMET I'll seeNONMET much .
’ Nowak laughedNONMET .
‘ Damn right .
We parkNONMET in the underground car-park , catchMET a special lift to the fifth floor and walk across the corridor into a special conference room .
’ ‘ That's trust ?
’ ‘ That's trust .
’ The Executive Director was already in the meeting room .
‘ Welcome to Langley .
’ He held his hand out in welcome .
When the introductions were complete , the Exec Director , the DDA , the DDI , Sorge and Nowak settledNONMET themselves round the small conference table .
‘ We have a new problem , ’ kickedMET off the Exec Director .
‘ The English operative who was guarding Trimmler has taken off .
He's also takenNONMET an agent of ours with him .
As hostage .
A woman .
We believeNONMET they're still in New Orleans .
’ ‘ Why ?
’ askedNONMET Sorge , concerned .
‘ I don't knowNONMET yet .
What about Goodenache ?
’ He decidedNONMET to turnMET the pressure on the Russian .
‘ He caughtMET a flight to Frankfurt .
The he hiredNONMET a car , but the car was foundNONMET abandonedNONMET on the outskirts of Frankfurt .
We are tryingNONMET to findNONMET our missing scientist now .
’ ‘ Are the German authorities involved ?
’ ‘ No .
We have our own means .
’ Sorge sawNONMET the Exec Director look up , his eyebrows raised suddenly .
‘ We both have our methods .
Even in an independent Germany .
After all , it was the death of our people in these situations that has broughtMET us together .
’ The Exec Director shruggedNONMET .
Bastard Russians were still up to their old tricks .
He ignoredNONMET the pointed look the DDI was givingMET him .
‘ I thoughtNONMET it best if the Director of our operations in New Orleans gaveMET you a run down of what has takenMET place up to now .
’ He sat back and letNONMET the DDA giveMET a full report , including the trip to the voodoo ceremony and all that followedMET .
Sorge didn't stirNONMET , even when they mentionedNONMET the gruesome spectacle of Trimmler's arms foldedMET in the sign of a swastika .
‘ We still aren't convinced that Trimmler's death has anything to do with the death of our agents .
There's no definite link .
’ ‘ The situation might be clearer when I've finishedNONMET .
’ Sorge lookedNONMET round the table , sawNONMET their undisguised curiosity .
‘ In 1942 , in Germany , we had a GRU network namedNONMET the Rote Kapelle … ’ ‘ What's that ?
’ askedNONMET the Exec Director .
‘ Red Orchestra .
The Nazis calledNONMET it that because we had radio operators we code-named musicians .
Their leader , the Chef , we calledNONMET him , was Leopold Trepper .
It was this group that radioedNONMET the warning of Operation Blue , the attack on Stalingrad that ledMET to Hitler's biggest wartime disaster on the Russian Front .
’ ‘ Who was feedingMET you all this information in Germany ?
’ askedNONMET the Exec Director .
‘ High-ranking officials .
Both in the military and in the Government .
They sawMET the damage Hitler was doing .
They didn't disagreeNONMET with his aims , only his methods .
When they sawMET that the war could not be wonNONMET , even as early as 1941 , some of them openedMET up lines of communication with us and the British .
’ ‘ We didn't getMET that sort of stuff till late into 1944 , ’ saidNONMET the DDA .
‘ You weren't Europeans .
We had centuries of contacts to fall back on .
For all their bravery and resourcefulness , their information was often wasted , because Stalin didn't believeNONMET them .
But then , he foundMET it difficult to believeNONMET anyone .
The Germans , with more sophisticated radio-tracking equipment , startedNONMET to track down the musicians .
Even Trepper was capturedNONMET and the Rote Kapelle was wound up at the end of 1942 .
Our information continued for a while , but it was of doubtful origin .
Trepper was interrogatedNONMET by the Gestapo and we believedNONMET he becameNONMET a double agent , a lot of misinformation was receivedNONMET in Moscow .
’ Sorge leantNONMET across and finishedNONMET his coffee before continuingNONMET .
‘ But we still neededNONMET information .
The overall network with sources inside Germany was the Rote Drei .
’ ‘ The Red what ?
’ saidNONMET the Exec Director , pleased that he had decipheredNONMET the first word of the new code-name .
‘ Three .
The Red Three .
BasedNONMET in Switzerland and named after the three transmitters that they usedNONMET .
The most important source of information , from agents inside Germany , was from a group under Rudolf Roessler .
His code-name was Lucy and his network , the Lucy Ring .
Roessler , or Lucy , was a Swiss Intelligence Officer of German extraction .
He had many contacts in Germany .
Lucy's four main contacts were Major General Oster who was the head of the Abwehr ; Admiral Canaris who was later hangedNONMET for his part in the 1944 bomb plot ; Carl Goehdeler who was leader of the official opposition to Hitler ; and Colonel Boetzel , the commanding officer of Intelligence Evaluation .
There were others , but Lucy never disclosedMET any of them to us .
’ ‘ Even after the war ?
’ askedNONMET the DDI .
‘ The Lucy Ring was disbandedNONMET in 1943 , after being responsible for some invaluable work .
I won't goMET through all their successes , but it was substantial .
The British were involved with them through us and it was their advanced work on breakingMET cyphers that enabledNONMET the ring to establishNONMET such a great record .
But the >ring disbanded , once more because of Stalin's penchant for secrecy , after Moscow triedMET to bypassMET Roessler and goMET direct to his Number Two .
’ ‘ So , where's the link ?
’ interruptedNONMET the DDA , impatient as ever .
‘ It's important you understandNONMET the background , ’ saidNONMET Sorge , not allowingNONMET the American to getMET under his skin .
‘ Nothing further cameMET from the ring until the last few weeks of the war .
With the Allies advancing on the Eastern and Western fronts , many high-ranking Germans were out to saveNONMET their own necks .
The Lucy Ring was reactivated , this time without the knowledge of the British .
’ ‘ Or the Americans , ’ commentedNONMET the Exec Director .
‘ I suggestNONMET you takeMET that up with Comrade Stalin , ’ repliedNONMET Sorge drily .
‘ It was an impressive list .
They didn't just have knowledge .
They also had wealth .
In all forms .
Art , cash , in every form possible .
They usedNONMET the ring because of their line into Switzerland .
They wantedNONMET the security of the Swiss banks and the Russian Bear .
One was dependent on the other .
’ ‘ So they boughtMET immunity .
While our boys were still gettingNONMET killed , ’ snappedMET the DDI .
‘ As were ours , ’ snappedMET back Sorge .
‘ But your hands weren't that clean .
You were bringingNONMET scientists and others into America just as we were .
Scientists with Nazi records , scientists with a history of brutality , war criminals .
’ ‘ Gentlemen , please , ’ saidNONMET Nowak , ever the diplomat .
‘ Can we just stickMET to what we're here to discussNONMET ?
GoMET on , Dimitri .
’ Sorge was annoyed with himself , irritatedMET that he had allowedNONMET the Intelligence man to getMET under his skin .
‘ Of course , ’ he smiledNONMET back .
‘ Now … ah , yes … we usedNONMET the Lucy Ring .
Many Germans , with their prizes , crossedNONMET safely into Switzerland .
They cameNONMET in cars , army lorries , even an aeroplane .
Their riches were storedNONMET in the banks under private accounts and then they were broughtNONMET through Czechoslovakia and East Germany into the Soviet Union .
’ ‘ All of them ?
’ askedNONMET the DDA .
‘ Those who brokeMET their word were hunted down .
’ ‘ And disposed of ?
’ ‘ Some neededNONMET remindingNONMET that we expectedNONMET them to honourMET their word .
’ It was a cold reminder of their world , of the business they tradedMET in daily .
‘ We had a large colony of Nazis livingNONMET in the Soviet Union .
They weren't all scientists , in fact we had >little use for most of them .
They had their own estates and farms to the west of Moscow .
They keptMET their secret identities and paidNONMET for it through their Swiss bank accounts .
But they remainedNONMET Germans , always dreaming of goingNONMET back to the Fatherland one day .
’ ‘ How many Nazis did you takeNONMET to Russia after the war ?
’ ‘ The Narodnyi Kommissariat Vnutrennikh Del , our People's Commissariat for Internal Affairs , was responsible for — ’ ‘ I never heardMET of them , ’ the DDA stoppedMET him .
‘ NKVD , ’ explainedNONMET the DDI patronizingly .
‘ WipedMET out twenty million Russians for Stalin .
That right ?
’ he challengedMET Sorge .
‘ More .
Thirty million .
According to official sources , ’ Sorge ripostedNONMET .
‘ A most useful organization .
’ That should shutNONMET them up .
He feltMET the look of disbelief pass between the Exec Director and the DDA .
The other just watchedNONMET him , the mocking smile still on his lips .
He would be the one Rostov had warnedNONMET him to be wary of .
He decidedNONMET to wipeMET the smile off his face .
‘ Thirty thousand .
That's how many East Germans we deportedNONMET into the Soviet Union after the war .
’ The DDI's smile disappearedMET .
‘ Thirty thousand Nazis ?
Jesus .
’ ‘ Yes .
And we keptNONMET another hundred and twenty thousand between 1945 and 1954 in Hitler's old concentration camps .
Many were Nazis , but businessmen and professionals were also our targets .
A third of those died .
The others were eventually releasedNONMET and absorbed into the Democratic Republic .
’ ‘ Including Nazi sympathizers ?
’ ‘ Probably .
’ ‘ Doesn't that concern you ?
’ Sorge shruggedNONMET .
‘ Not really .
I was eight years old at the time .
’ It wasn't the answer that the DDI expectedNONMET and Sorge regrettedNONMET his words .
He wasn't here to makeMET jokes .
‘ The thirty thousand in the Soviet Union , as I saidNONMET , becameNONMET a community in their own right .
Without our knowledge , over the years , with the use of their money and supportive people in the Swiss banks , they forgedMET contacts with those leftNONMET behind in East Germany .
They all had one dream .
To seeMET a unified Germany .
To regainNONMET what they had lostMET .
They had a code-name amongst themselves .
Something that linkedMET them , was a reminder of how they had gotMET there .
It had to be a safe name , innocuous , nothing that would drawMET attention to the past .
They rememberedNONMET the Lucy network , their gateway out of Germany .
They calledNONMET themselves DieNONMET Lucie Geister .
’ ‘ The Lucy Ghosts .
’ ‘ Yes .
’ ‘ Did the organization extendMET to America ?
’ The Exec Director was alarmed .
How the hell did they … ‘ Goodenache .
I guessNONMET he was one of them ?
’ askedNONMET the DDI .
‘ We weren't sure , but in view of his sudden departure , I would sayNONMET yes .
’ ‘ Which tiesMET Trimmler in .
And God knowsNONMET who else .
The name Grob Mitzer meanMET anything ?
’ ‘ He was one of their leaders .
It was the Lucy Ghosts who suppliedNONMET him with the cash that helpedMET him buildMET his empire .
’ ‘ Why didn't you stopMET it ?
DamnNONMET it , you knewNONMET about it for long enough , ’ snappedMET the Exec Director .
‘ We didn't realize how important it was .
We thoughtNONMET they were like any other wartime group , nothing more than reminiscences and marching songs .
Old men rememberingNONMET their youth .
The importance of it didn't surfaceMET until Germany was reunified .
And it was only the Englishman overhearingNONMET the conversation between Goodenache and Trimmler that finally bridgedMET the gap .
’ ‘ So why should the English guy take off with the girl ?
’ The DDI changedMET the subject .
‘ He's not one of us .
I suggestNONMET you askMET your Allies about that .
Maybe he's just an adventurer .
No more .
You must have clearedMET him .
’ ‘ Of course .
’ The Exec Director didn't wantNONMET his dirty washing wrungMET out in front of this Russian .
‘ Was there anything else ?
’ ‘ Only that the GDR , East Germany , as it was , is different to the West .
There are still many there who haven't forgottenNONMET the war .
Their attitude is different to us .
Some are still waitingNONMET for the war to endNONMET .
They're a traditional people .
Many ex-Nazis , even Gestapo , workingNONMET and living normal everyday lives .
’ ‘ WorkingNONMET for the Stasi .
’ The DDI remindedNONMET them all of the secret police who had runMET East Germany with an iron fist .
‘ Some , yes .
Others returned to the jobs they had before the war .
Within the new Germany , many of them have becomeNONMET frightened .
Their secrets are no longer safe .
Most of all , they fearNONMET the Israelis .
’ ‘ Is Frick one of these guys ?
’ askedNONMET the DDA , rememberingNONMET the name pickedMET up by Adam in New Orleans .
‘ No , ’ liedNONMET Sorge .
His orders were quite specific .
Don't ratifyNONMET any names .
They didn't wantNONMET the Yanks stumblingMET in and screwingMET up in an attempt to forceMET the issue .
‘ So what's all this gotMET to do with the deaths of our agents ?
’ continuedNONMET the DDA .
‘ We're not sure .
Except that a lot of the information we have both lostMET was about the Lucy Ghosts .
LinkMET that with Trimmler's death , Goodenache's sudden departure for Germany and the mention of the Lucy Ghosts during their conversation , and I thinkNONMET you will agreeNONMET that is the strongest lead we have to followMET .
’ Nobody spokeNONMET for a while , then the Exec Director reopenedMET the discussion .
‘ Has Moscow any suggestions as to how we should proceedMET ?
’ ‘ No , ’ repliedNONMET Sorge , which was what he'd been toldNONMET to sayNONMET .
‘ We hopedNONMET you would come up with something .
’ ‘ I'm sure we will .
’ ‘ Can you tellNONMET us the names of some of these Lucy Ghosts ?
’ cut in  AVP not PRP  the DDI .
‘ The ones in Russia .
How high up the ladder did they goMET ?
’ Sorge enjoyedNONMET his reply .
‘ In time , yes .
But I can tellNONMET you you're wastingNONMET your efforts lookingNONMET for Martin Bormann in South America .
He diedNONMET twenty years ago .
’ He watchedNONMET their stunned faces across the room .
Well and truly shaftedNONMET .
They saidNONMET little after that and Sorge was soon being escortedNONMET , with Nowak , down to the underground garage .
Five minutes later they were on their way back to Washington .
‘ Bormann .
Fucking Bormann .
They had him all the time , ’ saidNONMET an astonished DDI .
‘ Would'ya believeNONMET it ?
They probably gotMET Hitler stashedMET away too .
’ ‘ Well , it's been a real eye-opener , ’ saidNONMET the Exec Director .
‘ But let's not forgetNONMET we've still gotMET a crisis on .
FindNONMET the Englishman .
That's our first priority .
FindNONMET him and seeMET what the son of a bitch is up to .
’ The AmTrak Crescent Atlanta Georgia The train pulled out of Atlanta Station at 7.39 p.m. , four minutes behind schedule .
They had sleptNONMET well , eatenNONMET well , sleptNONMET again and eventually got bored with the passing countryside .
Adam had insistedNONMET they stayNONMET in the room and she hadn't foundMET a good enough reason to changeMET his mind .
He was thumbingNONMET through USA Today for the umpteenth time , lookingNONMET for something he might have missedMET , when he heardNONMET her giggling .
She was in the swivel chair , reflected in the window with the dark night as a backdrop , her head angled towards him .
‘ What's so funny ?
’ he askedNONMET pleasantly , putting the paper down .
‘ You sure knowNONMET how to giveMET a girl a good time .
’ ‘ Don't I ?
’ he grinnedNONMET back .
‘ According to all the books , a secret agent's life's meantMET to be glamorous .
We've spentMET twenty-four hours together and in that time I've been bittenMET by bugs in a hooker's bed , tied up a guy with no legs and stolenNONMET his wheelchair , stayedNONMET cooped up in a train for twelve hours with an attractive man and behaved like a virgin .
Don't takeMET that the wrong way .
But James Bond would've handledMET it differently .
’ ‘ He was Scottish .
I'm English .
They preferNONMET the ram 'em and bangMET 'em method .
We're more sophisticated in our approach .
’ ‘ What happensNONMET next ?
’ ‘ In which department ?
’ ‘ In the where're-we-going department .
’ ‘ To Nordhausen .
That's where Trimmler saidNONMET he would meetNONMET Goodenache .
’ ‘ Trimmler's dead .
’ ‘ And Goodenache's running from the Russians .
He can't go back there .
From what I heardMET , Germany was still their home .
And Nordhausen was where they sharedMET something special .
They wantedNONMET to goNONMET there .
If Goodenache's frightened , and he wantsNONMET to hideNONMET , that's as good a place as any .
’ ‘ Nordhausen .
Where is that ?
’ ‘ Central Germany .
South of Berlin , near what was the old East-West border .
An industrial town .
It was also where the Nazis built most of their rockets , the V1s and V2s , during the Second World War .
From what I rememberNONMET , they movedNONMET most of the rocket manufacture down there so that our bombers couldn't getMET to them .
Built the factory right in the heart of the mountains .
Used slave labour .
I thinkNONMET a lot of people diedNONMET in the making of those weapons , before they ever gotNONMET launchedNONMET and blewMET up half of London .
’ ‘ Why would they wantNONMET to go back there ?
’ ‘ Who knowsNONMET .
Maybe it was a job they never finishedNONMET .
’ ‘ But they did .
Those guys putMET people into space , putMET our people on the moon .
That's enough for most people .
’ ‘ That was just their work .
And they didn't do it for Germany .
They did it for their conquerors .
’ ‘ You tellingNONMET me that all those scientists spentMET their time in America and couldn't waitNONMET to getNONMET home ?
’ ‘ Not all of them .
Most of them becameNONMET good Americans .
And good Russians , I supposeNONMET .
But these two wantedNONMET to goNONMET home .
They never stoppedMET being Germans .
Maybe it's the only thing they ever dreamt about .
’ ‘ Weird .
’ ‘ Is it ?
To wantNONMET to goNONMET home ?
’ ‘ All they're after is their youth .
CatchingMET up with what they thoughtNONMET they'd lostMET .
’ ‘ Aren't we all ?
’ She shruggedNONMET and lookedNONMET thoughtful .
‘ Penny for them , ’ he saidNONMET .
‘ I was … uh … just being a woman .
’ ‘ TellNONMET me .
’ ‘ Thinking of Peter .
’ ‘ Ah !
The venerable ex .
’ ‘ I knowNONMET .
Here's us , headingMET for trouble and God knowsNONMET what else , and in the middle of you talkingNONMET about Nordhausen , I startNONMET thinkingNONMET of Peter .
Wondering what the hell he's up to .
The emotional mind of a woman .
’ ‘ StopMET knockingMET yourself .
’ ‘ MakesMET a change .
I usually leaveMET that to you .
’ He burst out laughingNONMET .
‘ OK , tough guy .
What's gotNONMET you so tickledNONMET ?
’ ‘ Here we are , crammed in a small compartment in a train , hurtlingNONMET across America being chasedMET by the CIA , the FBI and God knowsNONMET who else , and you're worried about your ex-husband's sex life .
Christ , he must've been good .
’ ‘ He was a shit .
’ ‘ So , why … ?
’ Adam stoppedMET and shookNONMET his head .
‘ Because some of us like shits .
Don't askNONMET me why .
’ She laughedNONMET with him .
‘ He's cheap , too .
He once boughtNONMET me a Louis Vuitton handbag .
Your travel case remindedMET me of it when we leftNONMET the hotel .
It was for our second anniversary .
I brokeNONMET the lock and took it back to the shop in La Jolla .
They toldNONMET me it was a fake .
A fucking Hong Kong fake .
Can you believeNONMET that ?
’ ‘ What did he sayNONMET ?
’ ‘ That he'd boughtNONMET it in New York when he was there on a visit .
And if he could rememberNONMET where the shop was , he'd go back and sueNONMET the bastards .
That's Peter for you .
A cheapskate liar and womanizer .
And I can't letNONMET him goMET .
That's really pathetic news .
Isn't it ?
’ ‘ No .
Just human .
’ ‘ Very understanding .
What would you knowNONMET ?
’ ‘ Maybe not women , but … my parents .
And my twin brother .
’ ‘ You're a twin ?
’ ‘ Was .
They all diedNONMET when I was nine .
’ ‘ You saidNONMET they were out of the country .
That you had guardians .
’ ‘ We all have things to hideMET .
’ ‘ Was he an identical twin ?
’ ‘ Yes .
’ ‘ That meansMET you cameNONMET from the same egg .
That right ?
’ ‘ Something like that .
’ He , in his usual stoical manner , didn't tellNONMET her that he had studiously learntNONMET everything about twins and their relationships .
‘ I had a boyfriend in High School .
He was a twin and his brother played on the football team .
If he gotNONMET hurt , my guy used to sufferNONMET , too .
We used to watchNONMET the game together and I'd suddenly seeNONMET him winceNONMET in pain .
Just like that .
And I'd lookNONMET on the field and it was his brother who'd been tackledNONMET .
’ ‘ Yes .
Something like that .
’ He laughedNONMET .
‘ I rememberNONMET once gettingNONMET a tap round the head from my dad .
I'd done something wrong .
I rememberNONMET him sayingNONMET it was a shame that he had to punishNONMET us both when only one of us was being naughty .
That tap sortedMET us both out .
’ ‘ Do you still feelMET he's with you ?
’ ‘ He is .
‘ Then you're lucky .
You're not alone .
Is that so bad ?
’ ‘ I don't knowNONMET why I'm alive and he's dead .
’ ‘ What's his name ?
’ ‘ Marcus .
’ ‘ Nice name .
I'm glad you've gotMET someone to loveNONMET .
It's important .
Ours is actually a new house .
It was but er the market was so low that he decidedNONMET not to well I don't thinkNONMET he could getMET a buyer actually , it's just stoodMET there so he he he letMET it out rather than have it stoodMET there with the option for us to buyNONMET it but I sayNONMET now the prices are lower he's not keen on sellingNONMET it at that price .
And I'm not prepared to goMET on payingNONMET three thousand a year rentingNONMET it to giveNONMET to him when I could be buyingNONMET one myself .
Yeah .
Mm .
I meanNONMET three thousand a year to rentNONMET one's a lot of money really .
Mm .
Hallo there Oh hallo yeah , sorry about that a bath and I was soakingMET in there for ages .
laugh I wasn't quite decent and I thoughtNONMET well I'm not lettingNONMET people in when I'm not decent Oh no .
I meanNONMET , please excuseNONMET the mess won't you .
Doesn't matterNONMET .
If you'd have letNONMET me in I could have washedNONMET your back for you .
laugh No no no .
No I can manageMET on my own thankNONMET you .
laugh Fair enough .
Fair enough .
Right .
Sorry to intrudeMET on your on your privacy .
That's okay .
But er there we are .
That's the kitchen is it ?
Economy seven .
it's dark in here .
bit sort of dark Yeah .
It's not normally .
Nice size kitchen isn't it ?
Yeah that's alright isn't there ?
Yes .
If you can imagineNONMET it without the boxes it Yeah .
Cos you're packing up .
laugh for a flat it's er Yeah .
It's a nice size .
It's a lovely size kitchen .
you ?
Oh yes .
What act what actually does the price includeMET ?
Does it does it That I couldn't tellNONMET you .
Is the cooker includedMET or not ?
No .
No .
That's That's , that's yours is it ?
Doesn't , doesn't sayMET .
It just saysMET a cooker point .
Cooker point .
Yeah .
Yeah .
Yeah .
All the units are obviously ?
Yes .
Yeah .
Oh yes , yeah .
Are they your carpets ?
No .
Okay .
And So the carpets may be as well .
So we might getMET might getNONMET the carpets in as well .
you'd have to negotiateNONMET on that one with Mr and Mr .
Yeah .
talkingNONMET about your home .
The carpets Everything that is here is mine with the exception of the carpets .
Yes .
Right .
Shall we goNONMET , is that the bedroom through there ?
No that's the bathroom .
Oh right .
Do you wantNONMET to comeNONMET ?
And is that a store cupboard ?
That's that's the airing cupboard through there .
But it This is the airing cupboard in here is it ?
it doesn't airNONMET .
I'll be honest with you , it doesn't airNONMET .
No .
It's er very cold in there .
Well it's good good , got a well laggedNONMET tank .
Yeah .
Which is not a bad Yeah that is it .
That's what he saidNONMET he had to That's not a bad thing in a way is it ?
No .
It's better than having the water .
They actually tookNONMET they actually tookNONMET the front off so that the water would getNONMET hotter .
Erm and it didn't workMET and you knowNONMET Mm .
I thoughtNONMET then I'd be able to useNONMET it as an airing cupboard but it still didn't workMET but it's like you saidNONMET it's because it's gotNONMET such a good Yeah .
Yeah .
Yeah .
And it does , once you've actually heatedNONMET the water it keepsMET hot for so long it's amazing .
Ours is like that isn't it ?
Yeah .
Yeah .
Where we are now is We've gotNONMET a similar one on ours .
Yeah .
Mm .
But it's a good store isn't it ?
For your ironing board and cleaner and Yes it's quite large as well isn't it ?
Mm .
Yeah .
I I meanNONMET you can putNONMET anything in there really .
Yeah .
I meanNONMET I did have some of the boxes in there until I sort of , thoughtNONMET while I was sortingMET things out .
Yeah , yeah .
The bathroom Yeah that's the bathroom in there yeah .
Oh it's a nice little bathroom as well isn't it ?
Oh that's not too bad either is it ?
No .
No it's pleasant .
It is isn't it ?
Yeah .
Isn't it .
Yeah .
It's quite Very pleasant .
Yeah , it's quite nice .
Big enough .
Yeah .
I likeNONMET the colour as well .
Yeah .
Yes it's a nice colour .
It's a warm colour .
Yeah .
That's right .
Mm .
Nice .
Yeah this would be terrific .
Yeah that's alright .
like we've gotNONMET the , quite , similar lot Yeah .
Same as we've gotNONMET at home .
we've gotNONMET already .
FeelsNONMET warm in here as well .
Yes .
Do you have any problem with the heating ?
Or Erm the bedroom doesn't getMET as hot as I would likeNONMET it Yeah .
but then I have circulation problems so I do feelNONMET the cold .
Yeah , yeah .
Erm but here in the kitchen it's lovely and warm .
But but it's quite , it's a warm it's a warm Yeah .
I meanNONMET that heater is not on full , not on full power .
That's quite good isn't it ?
like ours .
That's very much like the one , I meanNONMET ours is on about two or something like that and Yeah .
We have ours on two and it's ever so warm .
You goNONMET in there in the evenings you knowNONMET when it's been when it's been off and Yeah .
As I sayNONMET I meanNONMET well because I do feelNONMET the cold I supposeNONMET I have to have more heat than Yeah , yeah .
a normal person but er Yeah .
Quite nice really isn't it ?
Yeah I likeNONMET this too .
The bathroom's a bit chilly but once you've putMET that heater on and shutNONMET the door for a few minutes it's Yeah .
Yeah .
it's lovely .
Yeah we've gotNONMET one like that , I knowNONMET .
That's not my artwork on there , that's my little niece's artwork .
laugh space under there as well .
Yeah there's space under there for bits and pieces .
Yeah .
And it's amazing actually what you can getNONMET under there .
Ooh lookNONMET at this .
That's a nice size bedroom .
It is a nice size isn't it ?
Yes .
It's Eh ?
quite a big bedroom .
That's a smashing size bedroom isn't it ?
Mm it's a very good size .
This is where you isn't it ?
Mm .
Oh that's a lovely big bedroom isn't it ?
Yeah .
And you've gotNONMET the heater here over in the corner as well so it's gonNONMET na GotNONMET the heater yeah yeah .
air it through .
Yeah .
Yeah .
Cos you don't always wantNONMET it hot do you ?
No , we don't likeNONMET it too hot in the bed , well Stuart doesn't .
He's always well I'm always cold and he's always boiling .
laugh If I have the heat up very high in the bedroom he can't sleepNONMET .
laugh I'm impressed aren't you ?
It's ever so nice .
Very .
It is lovely , yeah .
Have the oth is there another flat then above this one then ?
Above .
Yeah that's a bit smaller .
Yeah the door there isn't it ?
That's a bit smaller .
Mm .
Do you hearNONMET them at all ?
Erm sometimes if he's been out very very late and I'm still up and he's comeNONMET home after a heavy night drinking .
I meanNONMET I'm not sayingNONMET he's alcoholic but he goesNONMET out with the lads and he you knowNONMET he'll he'll sort of thudNONMET up the stairs .
Mm .
But then he'll apologizeNONMET the next day .
Man after me own heart .
You knowNONMET I meanNONMET other than that , no I meanNONMET it it's not as if Yeah I was gonNONMET na sayNONMET same .
laugh this one .
laugh Oh probably , probably .
If he goesNONMET to the pub Stuart would probably knowNONMET him anyway .
laugh Might do yeah .
More than likely .
No , I meanNONMET it it's not as if you hearNONMET the telly or Oh I seeMET , these are his stairs .
That's the stairway .
That's his stairs , yeah .
Yeah .
Yes .
His door's just there isn't it ?
Yeah .
That's right , yeah that's Yes that's his door there and Yeah .
that's his stairs out .
But the upstairs one that's the kitchen's a bit smaller .
Erm and instead of the bath in the bathroom he's just gotNONMET a shower up there .
probably is wardrobes there .
I must admitNONMET I likeNONMET a shower but then again I do likeNONMET the chance to have a bath now and again bath every , every now and again yeah .
Yeah that's bigger .
Erm which is why I wentMET for the downstairs cos I had a choice of either .
But I wentMET for the downstairs one because of the bath .
Yeah , yeah .
Yeah be nice .
It's nice .
It's a nice size .
I meanNONMET we've just been to lookNONMET at some others and upstairs and downstairs .
But the upstairs one in the other one was was Was bigger than the downstairs .
Hell of a lot of difference really , it's surprising just a Yeah .
I meanNONMET I must admitNONMET I've lookedNONMET at some other flats .
Erm and one I lookedNONMET at I couldn't believeNONMET it .
Erm I meanNONMET it was a top floor flat .
And so I meanNONMET you had to sort of goNONMET up several flights of stairs and you walkedNONMET in and it , it looked lovely .
ThoughtNONMET oh this is nice it erm it ha it hadn't gotNONMET a separate kitchen , it was sort of like a kitchen diner Yeah .
Mm .
but it was very big .
A studio .
Mm .
It was very big .
I thoughtNONMET oh well this is lovely .
Walks into the bedroom , well you would have hardly got the bed in there never mindNONMET about anything else .
And er there was a hand basin in there and when you wentNONMET into In , in the bedroom ?
In the bedroom .
Yeah .
When you walkedNONMET into the well what I would call a cupboard but they classedNONMET it as the bathroom .
laugh You'd gotNONMET the toilet there and behind the door , I meanNONMET you had to sort of squeezeNONMET yourself and shutNONMET the door , and behind the door was a shower .
You're jokingNONMET .
No shower curtain mind you .
Even so , no room to swingMET a cat .
Terrible .
It was terrible .
Yes .
This is nice though .
I likeNONMET this .
Yeah I likeNONMET this one .
Very much .
Yeah it's a nice , just a nice size .
Do you knowNONMET who the builder is ?
It saysMET here local building .
Erm well no all I knowNONMET is Bates and Dack but they didn't actually , but I meanNONMET yeah they putNONMET it together .
They , they renovatedNONMET it .
They they they That's right yeah .
They renovatedNONMET it .
they re , revamped it or whatever .
allocated parking .
You just park in the road or ?
No , no there's the gravel down There's a space down the side is for parking .
Oh good .
So you've gotNONMET your own bit .
Oh yeah .
Yeah this one , I meanNONMET upstairs hasn't but this one has .
And is there anything there , I meanNONMET can you dryNONMET your clothes out there at all ?
No .
There's no line .
Can't getNONMET over the size of this though .
I thinkNONMET I'd probably putNONMET my wardrobes on his , on the stair wall .
That would dampenMET it a bit wouldn't it ?
Mm .
Nice .
I likeNONMET it .
It's lovely and warm .
Very nice .
yeah .
What is your situation ?
I meanNONMET , are you rentingNONMET the flat ?
Yes .
Yeah .
So how much notice do you have to giveMET ?
Er a month .
I'd likeNONMET you to giveMET me a month .
ThankNONMET you very much indeed for showingNONMET us your home .
ThankNONMET you very much .
I'm sorry to botherNONMET you .
laugh If you can hearNONMET next door's music I can assureNONMET you it's not a regular occurrence .
And if you tellNONMET him about it he tu , he's in a rock band .
Erm now and again he practisesNONMET but he usually triesNONMET to do it when I'm not here but erm not seemNONMET quite friendly then ?
Yeah .
Well we , we workNONMET shifts so he could probably do it when we're on earlies and laugh Well that's right yeah .
And when we're on lates he can do it at Yeah if you letNONMET it , I meanNONMET you knowNONMET he's fair like that .
If you letNONMET him knowNONMET .
We're not really in that much anyway are we ?
No .
No .
We workNONMET long hours and Thing is don't you findMET in th in this sort of environment if you've gotNONMET , you knowNONMET if they're nice people you all communicateNONMET don't you ?
Yeah , you can do things like that .
And that can workMET to your favour because if ever you have a problem , then you knowNONMET .
Yeah you can talkNONMET and That's right .
Yeah I meanNONMET that's the same as I di I must admitNONMET I did have sort of an argument with him once over his music .
We fellMET out for a little while but I meanNONMET , playingNONMET loud but I meanNONMET upstairs is fine .
And next door to him , number five they're an elderly couple erm and they've gotNONMET one of their sons livingNONMET there at erm he's disabled in some way but I'm not quite sure how .
Mm .
But they are very very friendly .
Very friendly they are .
Mm .
I supposeNONMET some people might sayNONMET to them oh you're being nosy but then that doesn't botherMET me because you don't tellNONMET them what you don't wantNONMET them to knowNONMET .
No .
That's right .
But it's nice because if ever you're poorly then it's in your welfare isn't it ?
That's right , yeah .
They keepMET an eye They do tendNONMET to keepMET an eye on me anyway .
Neighbourhood watch .
laugh .
It's , well there is a Neighbourhood Watch Scheme down here .
Really ?
Yes .
Oh yeah .
No I'm really impressed .
It's nice isn't it ?
Did you just wantNONMET to have a little wander ?
Yeah .
I likeNONMET this one too .
laugh We'll have them both shall we ?
Yeah .
One each .
We'll have them both .
Yeah , you can liveNONMET in one and I'll liveNONMET in another .
and liveNONMET in yours .
Nice aren't they ?
Lovely aren't they ?
Mm .
corner there Goodness .
Where do you getNONMET your carrots from ?
Er my nephew has a shop .
Erm in Leverington actually .
Yes What , just like a shop shop or a ?
A shop .
So you gotNONMET your you gotNONMET your washing machine under there ?
Washing machine and cooker and fridge So of course you could have in here .
Cooker , fridge .
I meanNONMET Yeah I sayNONMET , or you could have a taller fridge .
Oh yeah you could have a taller fridge .
Fridge fridge-freezer up there or against that window couldn't you ?
Have it away from that .
I likeNONMET them like that because what I tendNONMET to do with so I likeNONMET them that big because then I can cut them up into sticks , stickNONMET them in the fridge , then if I feelMET like being naughty not ever so naughty because I'm nibblingNONMET at carrots rather than a packet of crisps or something .
But they're a nice aren't they ?
Oh yeah and I meanNONMET that sort of size Yeah .
I knowNONMET .
laugh .
Well it's makeMET your mind up time .
laugh Well We've gotNONMET to seeMET what Mr saysNONMET first won't we ?
They're specially for baking .
I du n noNONMET .
I'm not waitingNONMET , botherNONMET waitingNONMET for the desired I meanNONMET with ordinary ones Well .
Er carrots are fifteen pence a pound but the potatoes th they're different .
I meanNONMET those bakers , they weren't very expensive erm but it's ordinary potatoes nice kitchen .
I thinkNONMET they're probably a little bit more expensive but he is much cheaper than in Well in Leverington then ?
Erm along the main Gorfield Road But I meanNONMET , you can't getNONMET those that size where I liveNONMET .
And I loveNONMET baked potatoes .
laugh We endNONMET up having That's right .
Yeah .
So thanks for showingNONMET us Yep , thankNONMET you very much .
Right .
ThankNONMET you .
disturbNONMET you again .
No that's okay .
Yeah .
Very nice .
Yeah I likeNONMET it .
Very nice .
Mm .
Yeah .
It's nice and central That's it , yeah .
I meanNONMET you're you're not sort of right in the centre of town , but Right in but it's only a few minutes away .
That's right yeah .
You don't have to have It's up the road and cross the main road and you're in Kingsway aren't you ?
You don't needNONMET any wheels do you , really ?
No .
No .
Which is just as well .
I crashedNONMET You're wheel- are you ?
Yeah I crashedNONMET mine .
PutMET it in the dyke .
Oh no .
laugh Very nice .
I was very lucky actually .
Mm .
Somebody was lookingMET after me cos I shouldn't have gotMET out and I did .
Mm .
It does actually .
I was out with erm an nephew la last night and I meanNONMET it wasn't icy but it was sort of gettingNONMET late and it was cold .
It was slippy .
And he was being silly .
And I saidNONMET to him if you don't packMET it up I'm gonNONMET na getNONMET out and walkNONMET .
Yeah .
Mm .
Cos And he saidNONMET well it's a long time since you had the accident .
I saidNONMET I don't careNONMET .
It's still , you knowNONMET silly little things No it still makesMET you very careful .
like that still unnerveNONMET me .
A bit of mud on the road and That's it , yeah .
It was slippy though I meanNONMET I noticedNONMET that even , you knowNONMET just pullingMET away or something like that okay I meanNONMET it's a reasonably car but I meanNONMET , you knowNONMET just a little bit too heavy on the accelerator You can feelMET it .
it's very easy you can feelMET it slipping That's right .
quite easily .
Thanks very much indeed .
That's alright .
Lovely .
Yeah thankNONMET you .
ThankNONMET you .
Rumpole tonight .
Yeah Rumpole and Last one .
Coronation Street .
Last one of the series .
Yeah I knowNONMET , they weren't very long series was it ?
Half a dozen , that's all it's been .
Coronation Street , half past seven till eight , Rumpole from nine to ten so you can comeNONMET out between eight and nine and ten and ele le le le eight and nine and ten and eleven , so you gotMET time for couple between eight and nine and a couple between ten and eleven , how's that ?
I've gotMET time ?
Yeah .
You meanNONMET Stuey's gotMET time !
laugh Well I'll stayNONMET and have my bath between eight and nine and you can goNONMET and have a drink no I don't thinkNONMET I'll be goingNONMET out this evening .
The accelerator is the one on the right sir !
He is an old gentleman , dear but er he isn't in a hurry what so ever .
LookNONMET he's slowing down there !
laugh Now he oh , oh he's foundNONMET the accelerator !
Bloody hell !
He's foundNONMET it !
He's  realizesNONMET which one it is bloody hell !
He's gettingNONMET too fast now !
Might be up to thirty .
No , no .
laugh We're actually goingNONMET a bit over thir we were goingNONMET forty five , we're now back to forty now .
laugh Perhaps she's toldNONMET him he's goingNONMET too fast !
laugh Careful , slow down !
It's forty mile an hour zone anyway , so he's in the right and you're in the wrong anyway .
It is not a forty mile an hour zone , so you're in the wrong !
What , when you're gettingNONMET into town ?
Not now it's not , it's still sixty odd .
Oh well it is a Lada darling .
The deal the deal i a Ha it won't goNONMET more than that !
the zone startsNONMET the zone startsNONMET there , thirty .
Yeah but perhaps it won't goNONMET more than that .
So I'm now within I'm now within the limit ooh !
So normally you are way past the limit ?
Cos you don't goNONMET as slow as this , even round here something like that Ann .
laugh Ann thirty five and he's speedingNONMET now .
laugh GoingNONMET too fast !
brake !
laugh You'll be old one day just thinkNONMET when you're a little old man sittingNONMET behind I am the wheel .
I am old .
Aye ?
I am old .
What , thirty three !
Well one day you'll be about eighty , dear and you'll be the one satNONMET there and someone sayingNONMET , bloody hell look at that old codger behind the wheel !
Only I won't be around to liveNONMET to seeNONMET it .
I du n noNONMET .
Well when you're eighty odd I doubtNONMET it dear .
Du n noNONMET .
I thinkNONMET I'm pretty confident on that one when you're eighty I should be ninety five and the laugh You never knowNONMET I don't thinkNONMET I'd be goingNONMET shoppingNONMET anyway .
You never knowNONMET dear , you may be a very very fit ninety five .
Oh Ann's gotNONMET ta goNONMET and definitely have an operation , it could be before Christmas I'll startNONMET Oh .
packing Friday on the way to mum Peter's mum she toldNONMET them she's just in so much pain , she wantsNONMET it doing so he's gonNONMET na getNONMET in , I saidNONMET , it's poss that she'll be in six days and probably off a few weeks after when she getsNONMET home it's operation on her neck and shoulder they're goingNONMET to releaseMET the nerve they reckonNONMET it's it's a she toldNONMET them and do what they will with it .
today running over cyclists out the way .
laugh you are in strange mood today , now you wanNONMET na run over a few cyclists , well there's an old lady and man there , I meanNONMET , why not pickMET them !
That old lady ?
Ha .
Do you knowNONMET who's that ?
Shame about that bungalow next door but one , cos that'd be a nice bungalow but it's not very lovely they don't lookMET after it very well .
Oh dear , they can't getNONMET the stuff up the stairs dear !
GotNONMET a wardrobe like ours and then oh no it isn't it's a combination one it's having to goNONMET up through the window let's hopeNONMET they don't dropNONMET it !
One with shelves in gentlemen's wardrobe .
Mhm .
Is it gonNONMET na getNONMET through the window , anyway ?
Not now the window's shut !
Ha .
Oh dear !
I'd goNONMET and giveMET him a hand but I do not likeNONMET ladders Fun isn't it ?
Shall we takeMET photographs ?
GetNONMET the camera out !
Well the chap next door's findingMET it very amusing !
I thinkNONMET everybody's findingMET findingMET it very amusing at the moment .
That's not gonNONMET na goNONMET through that window anyway , is it ?
Well , it's gonNONMET na be a tight old squeeze .
Why can't they takeNONMET it through the back door and up the stair ?
Perhaps it er you don't knowNONMET where the stairs and what kind of stairs it is but them kind of units usually comeMET to bits ours does .
Cos Rita assembledMET it for us .
Certainly having fun .
satNONMET here watchingNONMET him .
laugh Aye ?
Quite interesting .
It wouldn't be if it fellNONMET , would it !
Well then you'd laughNONMET I should thinkNONMET , knowingNONMET you !
Stuart !
Stuart !
Hello .
Do you thinkNONMET you could just openNONMET the door for me please !
HoldNONMET on to this laugh ComingNONMET back , I've gotNONMET ta I've gotNONMET ta standNONMET here so I can turn the camera on !
Ha .
goNONMET and getNONMET the camera !
Ha .
laugh laugh Aye ?
Ah well that's what we're all waitingNONMET for , we're waitingNONMET for you to dropNONMET it !
laugh They're watchingNONMET Neighbours ComeMET on , getNONMET up you lazy bugger !
What time of day do you thinkNONMET you callMET this !
ShutNONMET your mouth !
later .
A man tryingNONMET to getNONMET a wardrobe through the bedroom window over there .
I knowNONMET , what is goingMET on !
That's what we saidNONMET .
Aye ?
He must have a awful stairs !
I'm watchingNONMET these .
Yeah .
He's alright now He's just about gotNONMET it Yeah they've gotNONMET it through .
Is it in ?
Have they gotNONMET a Yeah just What were you shoutingNONMET then ?
You knowNONMET him ?
He's you're on I just candid camera !
GoMET on saidNONMET smile !
dropNONMET it he shoutedNONMET !
Smile , you're on candid camera !
Have a laugh and joke with Dick .
Dick ?
Have a laugh and joke with Dick .
Dick ?
Who's Dick ?
He's the What the old man or the young The man ?
the elder gentleman .
So you knowNONMET him ?
Through his father , yes .
How are you ?
Not too bad .
Not hundred percent either .
WantNONMET a cup of tea Jean ?
No .
Have you rungNONMET the doctor ?
TriedNONMET to .
Can't get through ?
No .
We've only poppedMET in to seeMET whether you would likeNONMET a lift into town now , before we goNONMET , rather than goNONMET into town and then comeNONMET back just in case you wantNONMET to GoNONMET into town for a li little while .
Oh yeah I would .
ThoughtNONMET you might wantNONMET a lift .
We don't wantNONMET anything up there .
Shopping but er I don't knowNONMET , if you likeNONMET it seeMET what I meanNONMET ?
Have a little drinky -poos .
No course not .
I'll ha I'll do it I'll I'll made the shepherds pie .
What with ?
A shepherd .
A shepherd .
laugh I've gotNONMET the carrots here for .
No I've I've gotNONMET some !
I had some .
Oh .
I had some my dear .
ComeMET on .
I foundNONMET yeah there is some out there , they were alright so I I I boiled them up they're alright .
I toldNONMET you to leaveNONMET it and I'll do it !
Ah ?
No that's alright !
You don't lookNONMET well , you're not right , I can seeNONMET , cos you don't lookNONMET well .
Aye ?
You don't lookNONMET well .
No I didn't feelMET al alright Ann .
Ah !
I'm alright .
You're not !
You knowNONMET , I don't feelMET myself anyway I can't I can't get through to anyway I'll tryNONMET so it doesn't matterNONMET .
While we're up town I shall goNONMET around there , you can dropMET me and I'll makeMET an appointment there while we're there .
Well it's gettingMET up there .
Who do you wantNONMET , Do Doctor or Yeah anyway it if possible ?
doesn't matterNONMET I'll , I'll keepMET phoningNONMET .
No might as well Don't worryNONMET I meanNONMET i to startNONMET with he Sh Sheila's coming over tomorrow , I can't goNONMET tomorrow really can I ?
Why not ?
Unless tomorrow night .
She can goNONMET with you .
And Ve Vera phonedNONMET this morning , Joe phonedNONMET this morning an all I didn't wantNONMET them to goNONMET out , anyway I've madeMET arrangements to goNONMET round to seeNONMET Vera on Friday afternoon and they they wentNONMET out to where was it ?
The she thoughtNONMET they were due a special run , cos you knowNONMET they didn't .
Oh dear !
She saidNONMET you'd be the I meanNONMET , and family when Wendy and that go and er she they had to with a la carte , oh it costNONMET her a bomb !
Ha oh dear !
They do a dinner special inside there , I meanNONMET most places do roastNONMET Yeah on Sunday they do .
Sunday lunch six quid you knowNONMET that kind of thing oh they had to payNONMET a la carte .
We had Oh .
No you watchNONMET it , we're goingNONMET .
It's alright , I'll seeNONMET it later on , it's on again We're at half past five .
We're poppingMET in to estate agents .
Erm it's a load of rubbish anyway !
Absolute rubbish !
We're goingNONMET to estate agents but we thoughtNONMET Are you ?
we'd popMET in seeNONMET how you were and Yeah I'm alright SeeNONMET if you wantNONMET anything up town .
no I feelMET about a I I'll I've saidNONMET to Ann , no I feelMET alright Ann but you knowNONMET just I du n no I'm not quite myself am I ?
I don't feelMET No .
very energetic and I should be alright now after been to sleepNONMET should do I'm alright I can't thinkNONMET of anything I wanNONMET na getNONMET I wantNONMET up town anyway nothing think of anything Just that norm normally I don't , very nice , thankNONMET you very much .
Washing powder or big bulky stuff that Can't carryNONMET it .
do do walk back from town with , after all .
No I did that the other day yo StruggledMET with it a little I wantNONMET some mincemeat .
GetNONMET some up town , if that's what you wantNONMET .
No .
She doesn't really likeNONMET his stuff .
Mm if you don't mindNONMET .
You wantNONMET some mincemeat ?
Well yeah , no I've light bulbs I meanNONMET I could makeNONMET you a list down but it doesn't matterNONMET I can getNONMET that tomorrow Ann I'll goMET down tomorrow you knowNONMET , I'll be up in time .
Just the thought Yes fair enough thanks very much .
you did sayNONMET that you'd likeNONMET to comeNONMET .
Yeah I did .
You ought to Rainbows or something gotNONMET the car at least then Yeah .
Is that what you wantNONMET ?
Well I ca I can't thinkNONMET !
I can't I can't really thinkNONMET I'll have to make a list out you knowNONMET but er you knowNONMET I gotNONMET just thinkNONMET of anything that's , you knowNONMET as I sayNONMET I've gotNONMET gotNONMET some fo cat food will getNONMET some dry cat food yeah Oh I cou sta if I startNONMET thinking I'll I'll I'll laugh Start thinking , got nothing lose , sta start MakeNONMET a list , I'll getNONMET it for you .
thinking we'll soon getNONMET them and saveMET you carryingNONMET it tomorrow , then .
Get and that and all's there anyway .
Yeah cos I might I might not goNONMET up , you knowNONMET , I seeMET what Sheila saysNONMET so Well that's it , if you don't feelMET like walkingNONMET round the town tomorrow .
SaveMET you , saveMET you carryingNONMET them .
I'll tellNONMET you what I've I'm alright , but I feelMET a wee dizzy you knowNONMET I feelMET as if I'm a bit no I'm alright Ann , I meanNONMET , feelMET a bit ba ah I meanNONMET I'm sorry I do have to buyNONMET a feel a bit of , I feelMET a bit dizzy you knowNONMET as if I cough you knowNONMET I needNONMET new glasses or something , you knowNONMET that's how I feelMET .
A change your mind Hey yeah , alright , yeah I am o I meanNONMET I'm not alright , I feelMET very dizzy , like I sayNONMET I feelMET I feelMET a bit kind of heady you knowNONMET but I will goNONMET and have a check up .
laugh I'll tryNONMET again bloody lucky !
You seeMET I meanNONMET Lunch time is no good !
no , you s I've been tryingNONMET all morning .
Don't startNONMET If you Ann will you , I'm not , I'm we will goNONMET in and do it I'll tellNONMET you what I'll tellNONMET you what I saidNONMET erm ah ah ah ah she's talkingNONMET to herself , but Ann will getNONMET on to you she'll thinkNONMET I haven't done it !
laugh I knewNONMET I'd be in trouble !
Well we'll we'll We I'll callMET in We'll callMET in , that will be better than phoningNONMET at least you knowNONMET whe you knowNONMET you're gonNONMET na getNONMET there .
And I'll makeMET appointment .
What for tomorrow , if possible ?
Whenever you wo I meanNONMET yo yo bothered when when they'll wi wi wi will be , you knowNONMET .
If you can't getMET it done tomorrow I'll tryNONMET and getMET you a Doctor so she It's gettingNONMET up there as well lo , you knowNONMET I haven't gotMET the strength and energy to walkNONMET there , I don't thinkNONMET .
It's we'll makeMET it in the morning , one morning and then we can comeNONMET out at erm That a takeNONMET you up .
What are you this week ?
I'm on .
Oh you're on lates this week .
Two till one .
Ah ?
Two till one .
Two till one , yes I'll tryNONMET again Ann .
No , don't botherNONMET !
SitNONMET !
Ha !
We'll callMET in .
We'll callMET in Well I meanNONMET it's not , it's not We'll callMET an emergency , is it ?
No but no but you wantNONMET to seeNONMET Well just sayNONMET and just sayNONMET that I had a bit of a ba an and I'd likeNONMET a check over that's all just sayNONMET that to them if you wantNONMET alright ?
Wh where's the estate agents anyway , you're goingNONMET to here ?
There's Its in the Do you getNONMET one of these Ann ?
Sometimes .
Oh they're , t you rememberNONMET you were on about it yesterday about the services they're all there .
services are in aren't they ?
They're all there LetNONMET me seeNONMET .
whole lot .
Just wantNONMET to I just wantNONMET a that will do me upstairs .
Could you getNONMET i , getNONMET some of them ?
Do I getNONMET Well I meanNONMET I can getNONMET that up the end .
We'll getNONMET it in town while we're there mother !
Might as well getNONMET it in town .
We're gonNONMET na be in Horse Fayre so GonNONMET na be in erm Oh eh there's a place there , no there isn't , is there ?
The one that do the Gateways in Horse Fayre Aye ?
GotNONMET Gateways , we're goingNONMET to Horse Fayre Do you er Oh you're goingNONMET to you're goingNONMET to Gateway .
GoingNONMET there anyway .
We're in town , just in town doesn't matterNONMET where we goNONMET , does it ?
Well you can getNONMET ah bringNONMET my mince back .
Budgie food do you wantNONMET any budgie food ?
Millet ?
Sand sheets .
No no got all that .
What else ?
No getNONMET a couple of light bulbs .
Yeah .
I've gotNONMET to getNONMET some , what sort of will you needNONMET ?
Aye ?
I I've had to bringNONMET yeah .
you one , No that's alright getNONMET me a getNONMET me a pack , you knowNONMET .
Sixty .
Yeah .
You knowNONMET .
Sixty watt light bulbs Yeah I've gotNONMET a hat .
Fags ?
Yeah .
Cheap fags or cheap Yeah you can , yeah I'll giveNONMET you some money light bulbs and mincemeat , that cos that ain't very heavy to carryNONMET , in n it ?
Oh , I thinkNONMET they're about two pound bag of that ?
Yeah yeah might as well I'll makeNONMET the mincemeat , mince pies this and giveNONMET you some Ann that'll saveMET you doing them , won't it ?
When are you gonNONMET na makeNONMET mince pies ?
Any time .
Not today .
Not today , why ?
laugh Cos he'll eatNONMET them , he'll be stoodNONMET there waitingNONMET for them comingNONMET out of the blooming oven !
have some for tea .
laugh Mum don't feelMET like makingNONMET mince pies , today .
Well yo you'll have to er I'll makeNONMET you some at home got some Don't forgetNONMET mincemeat at home .
You useNONMET that ?
Don't forgetNONMET to getNONMET er cooking apples .
What did he sa he sayNONMET ?
Don't forgetNONMET to getNONMET cooking apples , to putNONMET in the mincemeat .
I've gotNONMET some cooking apples out there Oh isn't he , I could hitNONMET him !
Why doesn't he makeNONMET th makeNONMET your own bloody mincemeat then !
Yeah that's cos I makeNONMET the pa the pastry and you can Oh I'll don't knowNONMET I pastry , I can't do that , I can do the rest but I can't makeNONMET the pastry .
Have you gotNONMET in your hand did I sayNONMET , dry cat food ?
Dry cat food , light bulbs and mincemeat , Aye ?
WantNONMET some ketchup ?
No , got some Salt ?
Tomato puree ?
What about flour and things , have you gotNONMET enough flour to getNONMET To do the mince pies .
nutmeg ?
Oh I haven't gotNONMET that long to makeNONMET them , yet am I ?
I knowNONMET , but you shall have to bringNONMET it home won't you ?
You've gotNONMET you've gotNONMET , you might as well buyNONMET a big bag of flour and flour and then to carryNONMET home here .
GoNONMET and have a look , seeNONMET what you got .
Oh alright Well you might as well , mightn't you , and it'll saveMET you Yeah alright .
carryingNONMET it .
Yep , yep .
At least you won't have to carryNONMET it , at least we've gotNONMET the car and we can we can Yeah carryNONMET it between us , that's no problem is it ?
Yes , Cos if you're not feelingMET up to it , as well lard ?
No it's the flour and things like that we saidNONMET it's You can buyNONMET carryNONMET it home here .
That's what I sayNONMET , you buyNONMET three pound of flour and two pound of mincemeat in a jar .
Yeah and cat food and Don't soundMET a lot of weight but No I knowNONMET time you getNONMET it back here it is .
Won it in the raffle gonNONMET na have a drop in our tea , warm us up !
Oh I bloody wonNONMET a bottle wine and I could of wonNONMET .
John comeNONMET to me and he saidNONMET is that your number ?
You've wonNONMET a bottle of whisky , Stuart saidNONMET thankNONMET you .
laugh Oy !
That's my ticket , not yours why are you sayingNONMET thankNONMET you !
I du n no just I saidNONMET to him I'll wrap it up and giveNONMET you it for your Christmas present !
laugh I paidNONMET for it didn't I , a pound in a draw .
Yeah I knowNONMET .
Christmas present , a pound .
!
Ha ha Oh !
laugh WantNONMET to it .
Middle of the week .
Not that bad , that's it .
Not that bad .
First he's never seenMET , surprises he's always .
Yeah .
Very true .
especially on paper he Yeah .
always such goingMET on .
I knowNONMET , yeah .
I'm not keen .
No I've had Ooh !
Ooh !
That's close !
Here Only me about me gettingNONMET drunk , as if I would dear !
When ?
Anytime But I rememberNONMET bloody you coming in on a Sunday morning sometimes you , bloody can hardly the bed !
Ha ha .
What a bloody night was Stuart .
Shut up !
laugh ThoughtNONMET you might knowNONMET a and all , in about five minutes !
But yeah , he toldNONMET them !
No I didn't .
Yes you did .
Shut up !
You did .
You probably did , not me .
No I never sworeNONMET everybody to secrecy but they all knowNONMET it you cos you toldNONMET them !
As you always still continueNONMET to tellNONMET them yes you do .
If I wantNONMET it spreadMET around .
That givesMET you your bit of character .
Yeah can't grumbleNONMET .
Yeah , we don't rowNONMET , luckily , ha ha .
Yes we do .
laugh World war that bloody no good fool !
Must be that !
Can you blameNONMET him I can't helpNONMET What ?
be amazed .
You replace the We ain't gotMET a , just a mad man !
He won't lastNONMET for a ten now done the , done the Welcome Break , they done the Char Grill , now they're on the Tescos .
Can't goNONMET any more , Ann .
We gotNONMET a thousand more do a Sainsburys and that's it .
Yeah that's what Ann saidNONMET .
That won't lastNONMET till ten I'd rather goNONMET and rackNONMET .
never used to goNONMET on the Oh it's by the the van Teresa Yeah .
and John a bloody at Tescos .
If you askNONMET me Why are they doing it , if it's not to do ?
I du n noNONMET , what can you do Ann !
Ah yeah , that's my game .
Did you getNONMET ?
Got radio yes Why are they doing all that and there's nothing to do ?
Should of I gotNONMET a somewhere .
Well , you'll have nine bulbs and lights out got a thousand to do Ann's had What ?
Ann's had , Merv , John Teresa , Paul and Vi's all trussingNONMET done the rest the of my trussing , I've done the Char Grill , I've done Welcome Break , now they're on the Tesco .
I've only gotNONMET a thousand Sainsburys to do and we'll be all done by Nine o'clock .
or not long after so why have they been doing that if there's nothing much to do ?
Why is John , and Ann and Paul and Teresa and all them been on that trussing line , and Merv .
Probably tryingNONMET to getNONMET ahead for that , one of those .
Oh yeah , but I wonderNONMET if we're gonNONMET na all finishedNONMET by nine o'clock and you'll have us all in your ha ha ha Don't forgetNONMET Ann , in fact it's probably one of and in the back .
Well we would , but we'll liveNONMET .
I've had a go but obviously not Not much else to do .
not much about no .
Well , with all the trussing the might carry on trussingNONMET and getNONMET that done .
Or else we goNONMET in the afternoon and trussNONMET your pvc .
I don't knowNONMET mate , o I only knowNONMET that that's takeMET us Ann and Paul and Ann and John and all them all doing all the others so We really ought to be goingNONMET to some to trussNONMET .
There we goMET , dear .
Ooh thankNONMET you .
that in your tea .
Is there enough in that cup ?
laugh I'm goingNONMET .
SeeNONMET you at my mums .
But Stuart when we've done the we're gonNONMET na bookNONMET that .
Aunty Mary .
Alright ?
Okey dokey SeeNONMET you later dear .
Yeah seeNONMET you at the car .
Oh dear , oh Lord !
I better goNONMET and Well we certainly won't lastNONMET till ten , not No .
So we gotNONMET a thousand letters to do that's all , well it might be over I don't knowNONMET they're but isn't he ?
Sort of jewellery you seeMET .
Do they ?
for Tesco and Yeah quite casual erm Sainsburys .
Ooh !
They've all finishedNONMET early , they've unless they came in late with the order or something , extras or something .
I knowNONMET five hundred and sixty was extra cos Stuart gaveNONMET me two hundred short of a thousand .
Mm , cos somebody hadn't up wrong then Where is she ?
Probably ain't calculatedNONMET enough have they ?
No that's what I sayNONMET if calculated wrong We're always out they always tendNONMET Mm to goMET over don't they ?
Yeah , little bit over .
And they probably do the very small bags without .
Yeah and that's .
Bags that weren't that have comeMET over there and need a recount Kerry !
Hiya .
How's it goingMET ?
Not too bad .
Are you on tea ?
Yep , just goingNONMET .
Ten ten fifty eight .
I've go I've been in work some of these His next victims !
AskNONMET yourself They've goneNONMET on holiday .
Which one ?
Yeah and we're supposed to do all of them you seeMET put John , one of us start trussingNONMET early but we didn't needNONMET one Ann's gotMET another team in the other room doing it .
There still in there .
I'll I'll be finishedNONMET before long .
Yeah ?
Well , about another hour .
Have we gotNONMET some more Birds Eye pies up to trussNONMET ?
Yeah they didn't do them !
Actually they perhaps letNONMET us goNONMET back on them then Well tomorrow if you do that , I thinkNONMET perhaps that's the best kind of action , have a word with him and goNONMET down I meanNONMET You meanNONMET goNONMET back on them , cos we didn't finishNONMET them cos there was three pallets and we didn't even do two .
There's only twelve with a last week weren't there ?
We didn't finishNONMET them cos they wantedNONMET to start trussingNONMET early It's what you had last week .
and then Ann started that little line trussingNONMET you seeMET , so we've done it between us but I've gotMET a thousand to do and she's gotMET about four d t Ann , even if they do some I betMET you feelNONMET like a now , give them in when they can't trussNONMET them du n noNONMET .
That I've only had We give them in when they cameMET trussedNONMET with the though we had before .
It's not very heavy Really to startNONMET a truss that's Well , with the two lines goingMET yeah would have been about right then but seeMET , John I don't supposeNONMET he realisedNONMET Ann was gonNONMET na fetchNONMET all the people out of here there and everywhere and start that up .
What did he do , did he sayNONMET Well I pa Ann ?
No no so she started trussingNONMET , helpingNONMET me .
Yeah yeah but he wouldn't I supposeNONMET that's what John thoughtNONMET , we might not getMET them done , start early and getMET them finishedNONMET That's good .
He just saidNONMET leave the Bird's Eye pies and start your trussing .
That was goneNONMET seven o'clock when Yeah .
By time we've clearedMET all that especially the All that pvc , Ann !
are fourteen .
and T D C when we come in , I meanNONMET they hadn't checkedNONMET any goujons , they hadn't checkedNONMET any of the fillets .
Bag here Perhaps they'll getNONMET them .
There was two baskets of bones .
Fillet drums Jeanie and Hilary are doing that .
GoNONMET back and getNONMET some more breadcrumbs Yeah tha yeah and I meanNONMET yeah We'll definitely be finishedNONMET in about an hour one .
Won't be till ten anyway .
And gettingNONMET all the Bird's Eye .
Didn't we have a we're gettingNONMET If we get in trainee .
in the daytime I'm goingNONMET home I'm not  puttingNONMET  up with like that !
laugh They didn't wantNONMET me !
Never mindNONMET you got as far as you could , so at least you got that far Deirdre .
I thinkNONMET I'll workNONMET nights only cos Yeah .
Joe and I meanNONMET I comeMET a long way and they saidNONMET he toldNONMET them I wanNONMET na popMET in Friday morning before we goNONMET He was surprised He saidNONMET well I weren't surprised , I saidNONMET but er you knowMET I wantNONMET a name yeah well , he just saidNONMET well I can't he can't faultNONMET me on anything .
Yeah it's just nice to knowNONMET if there is something wrong I knowNONMET .
isn't there ?
Any Well , hangMET on a minute I saidNONMET if I've gotMET ta problem time er , putMET it right .
Yeah .
if there's any weak stuff then I saidNONMET Er yeah I'll work it out yeah you can and I can workNONMET on it .
yeah that's it .
Oh I wentNONMET we were absolutely you knowMET everybody claimed something You knowNONMET what he's like well he toldNONMET me when I claimedMET that sort of person , you tookMET three of them didn't you ?
Who's that behind ?
He had Peter , he had that Peter who's Peter , David , didn't they and David Over Cook's side , he only lastedNONMET about three more weeks , I meanNONMET three weeks Glenys has been doing it ever since , han that Ian only lastNONMET about three or four weeks , he was goneNONMET .
That one he wentNONMET didn't he ?
Yep .
And that Peter .
Yeah .
He couldn't even do your He wouldn't d , he didn't wanNONMET na do it , did he ?
He tookMET it back .
He saidNONMET he wantedNONMET office .
Ha !
You knowMET , I rememberNONMET him Yes .
comingNONMET in cos John Yeah .
saidNONMET well you do what you did with him and show showingNONMET him how to do all the jobs , he saidNONMET I don't wantNONMET to learnNONMET them I've comeNONMET to superviseNONMET , he saidNONMET I don't wanNONMET na getNONMET mucky !
Oh no !
I couldn't believeNONMET my ears !
I saidNONMET Oh !
So why John saidNONMET would I showNONMET you how to trussNONMET nice , I don't wishNONMET to learnNONMET thankNONMET you !
Is that what he saidNONMET to you ?
Yeah he saidNONMET I Oh I didn't knowNONMET that !
He saidNONMET he'd comeNONMET to superviseNONMET , not to do it !
I've no no wish to learnNONMET it thankNONMET you .
laugh I saidNONMET , well fair enough , I'll goNONMET to do something else !
laugh SeeNONMET John when he we as soon as John arrivedNONMET he saidNONMET to me will you takeNONMET me he saidNONMET , I don't wanNONMET na learnNONMET it proficiently but I wantNONMET to knowNONMET every job so I then tookNONMET And then watch up and down every line .
every line .
You gotNONMET to expectNONMET to be and i and when this Peter comeNONMET he saidNONMET well you knowMET , just showNONMET him everything and like you did me and he saidNONMET he didn't wanNONMET na knowNONMET thankNONMET you .
I didn't knowNONMET he saidNONMET that to him !
Yeah he saidNONMET Yeah .
laugh he saidNONMET I comeNONMET to sup be supervisor he saidNONMET , I don't knowNONMET , I don't wishNONMET to learnNONMET all that !
Well can you superviseNONMET if you don't knowNONMET what the hell's goingMET on !
I sa saidNONMET to John That's what John saidNONMET , he wantedNONMET lo I saidNONMET last week so he good , a rough idea John , I hopeNONMET you don't mindNONMET , I saidNONMET gotMET ta callNONMET he saidNONMET you Mm .
he saidNONMET you should have askedNONMET Jim Yeah .
because it was between you and him , .
Well that's certainly my feeling I'm naturally disappointed but it I sayNONMET , you did well and i er Mick saidNONMET to me last night , he saidNONMET to me you can never fitMET not  usedNONMET to it , but No point is there ?
No there's certainly That's it .
I saidNONMET I've failedNONMET !
I saidNONMET I just haven't gotNONMET .
That's it .
You're not forgivenNONMET !
No I'm listeningNONMET to them , I'm doing a project .
Aha .
I'm tapingNONMET all your conversations anyway Oh right .
not in the factory I didn't li , I could of askedNONMET Tom .
What in here ?
Everywhere I goNONMET .
Oh I shall be quiet .
It's all anonymous , you're not e e e nobody knowNONMET who it is , it's for it's for a dictionary and they wantNONMET new words that are commonly used and they don't wantNONMET and all old words that never getNONMET usedNONMET it'll be droppedMET in the next edition of the dictionary .
I go I anything .
No it's er I'm tapingNONMET all my conversations I have with everybody for a week .
What if people don't wantNONMET you to ?
Oh yeah you you have to eraseNONMET it but nobody's gonNONMET na sa , I meanNONMET to sayNONMET , nobody knowsNONMET who you are , what you've saidNONMET anyway at all , do they ?
Well I don't knowNONMET , if you're just gonNONMET na write down What ?
what you putMET on there and that I don't writeNONMET anything , I sendNONMET the tape in , they don't knowNONMET who you are you're just a it's just a voice speakingMET nobody knowsNONMET who you are or anything , they only knowNONMET me nobody else .
then !
laugh Why ?
Who's who's gonNONMET na knowNONMET when they lis to compileNONMET a dictionary and what words you useNONMET who's gonNONMET na knowNONMET who you are ?
Ha du n noNONMET speaking That's all well if you wantNONMET it erasedNONMET , I will I meanNONMET it's up to you entirely Well you won't have any trouble with Jeanie .
but laugh Ay , I I've I've saidNONMET that to them I saidNONMET well you might have , if I takeNONMET to workNONMET you'll certainly hearNONMET some they saidNONMET tha well if that's common usage words that's what it has to be and words that we never use at all that are in dictionaries and nobody ever usesNONMET them , they wantNONMET to knowNONMET common ordinary speech words that we useNONMET .
Can't getNONMET more common than me !
Ey I toldNONMET them , I saidNONMET you might hearNONMET some right a I was in the pub Saturday night , mind I did tellNONMET afterwards and he's ever such a nice bl fella he comesNONMET over door laugh so he's killingMET himself laughingNONMET I I've gotNONMET to tellNONMET you Ron , I've been tapingNONMET he saidNONMET I don't giveMET a monkeys you tapeNONMET what , he saidNONMET letNONMET them all hearNONMET , they'll all be able to passMET it round !
laugh It ain't , well it wasn't really disgusting but it Are you ready ?
saidNONMET he wouldn't .
I saidNONMET I gotMET a good joke for you here , started to laughNONMET and he saidNONMET I ain't saidNONMET it yet !
laugh Well I didn't tellNONMET him it he can windNONMET it just eraseNONMET it I meanNONMET I don't I saidNONMET I'm alright love just to do all that , I've gotNONMET twenty tapes !
Someone askedNONMET me whether , I thoughtNONMET it'd be a bit of fun But as I sayNONMET nobody knowsNONMET who you are , or what you've saidNONMET or anything so it doesn't matterNONMET does it ?
It's the words they're interested in , not what you actually sayNONMET and the words that yo people are usingNONMET I've gotNONMET now , so I don't even thinkNONMET of it , it's just there and I just talkNONMET normal that's the idea really and if anybody asksNONMET you what you're doing , then you tellNONMET them and it and you sayNONMET , if you don't wishNONMET to be on it , well wipeMET it off but nobody knowsNONMET who you are anyway so what difference does it makeMET ?
Unless it got personal , I'd turn it off , I meanNONMET I meanNONMET when we wentNONMET the estate agents and solicitors Be Alan , be Alan Whicker !
sort of sitNONMET there puttingMET what the solicitor saidNONMET in your turn them off Or if anybody toldNONMET me , I meanNONMET I wouldn't and talkingNONMET in confidence about their private life or No .
just turn them off , and that's it Just normal conversations the words that people use in common different areas of the country , with accents and th dialect and one thing and another it's for the Oxford English Dictionary the next edition .
It is very old I'm more than happy with something like that .
Do we second hand suite second hand suite , the whole lot .
It's that We goMET for a second hand suite as well or a microwave .
GoMET for a microwave or do you just goMET for We've gotNONMET nine hundred pounds approximately , after the cooker and the fridge .
Five hundred pound for carpets , leavesMET four hundred pound , two hundred pound for suite and the microwave laugh sayMET , there's so many combinations that's the thing isn't it ?
Yep .
There are so many combinations of what to have , what to getNONMET , what we can't getNONMET , what we needNONMET really I thinkNONMET is , what we needNONMET is obviously goingNONMET to be priority isn't it ?
Yes .
Carpets , cooker fridge Yeah .
they're the definite needs and erm That was eleven hundred pounds approximately , you've gotNONMET four hundred pound really to playMET with , approximately four hundred pound left over , sayMET five hundred pound , six hundred for electrical goods .
Pardon ?
Seven hundred did you sayNONMET , oh no two seventy nine and three twenty something weren't it ?
Yep .
Er three , two About six hundred .
Six hundred , yeah .
Six hundred for them two and five hundred for carpets .
Eleven , you've gotNONMET four hundred pound , you gotNONMET so it's a good second hand one or a cheapy no , well it would be a cheapy I toldNONMET him most of them around about seven hundred and ninety nine Decent A reasonable one , I meanNONMET you can goMET up two thousand for a good one , but a reasonable one you wouldn't getNONMET nowadays under seven hundred and ninety nine I thinkNONMET you'd be better off with a with a new cooker and fridge Oh yeah , definitely I thinkNONMET , you can goMET second hand rather than goMET second , but , er , you knowNONMET er , at least if you goMET in there at least you've gotNONMET gotMET gotMET a guarantee for six months yeah , yeah , but but , at least you knowNONMET you're goingNONMET to getMET a decent amount of Two or three years on the others .
As with a new one you'll probably gonNONMET na getMET four , five , six , seven , eigh I don't likeNONMET , just , I couldn't be like Deirdre and , put me overall on and in go  in without collectingMET me thoughts gettingMET myself together Deirdre never arrivesNONMET till about three minutes before she getsNONMET in the door , she's puttingNONMET her overall on sayingNONMET comeMET on ladies , its time were , but she's puttingNONMET her overall and on laugh , and they all sitNONMET there lookingNONMET at her and so they all sitNONMET there lookingNONMET at her and sayingNONMET bloody hell she ain't gotNONMET her own hat on laugh , we've been here quarter of an hour and she walksNONMET in the door , takes her coat off and saysNONMET comeMET on ladies you're supposeNONMET to be off your hind by two o'clock , leavingNONMET here at two She's right .
I knowNONMET she's right , but she should , setMET an example in some ways laugh , mm people are so used to her now they just lookNONMET at her and carry on talkingNONMET laugh silly old bugger , you knowNONMET , laugh , shut up Deirdre I'm don't wantNONMET to do that , shouldn't be , cos there wasn't much to putNONMET on , although they leftNONMET , leftNONMET quite a bit off yesterday , they cutMET short , there was five hundred breast portion short and two hundred oyster eggs , so Deirdre informedNONMET me but they injectedMET six hundred too many and four hundred eggs to Tescos all quite ridiculous .
Pardon ?
PutMET them off today's I knowNONMET but it's just , waste of time in it ?
they'd been better spentMET to finishNONMET the order that they did have , and injectMET that , ha oh be fair to do that to useNONMET though , no doubt they will , pick out all the things we didn't do right bloody should done too many of this or not enough of that Ah , yeah .
difference wasn't worth puttingMET that down .
Not really , not this time of the day is it ?
Mm , it would bounceMET up and down lik a yo-yo Can't I do nothing ?
Lovely , thankNONMET you darling , oh we didn't getMET much further on there , what we startedNONMET with this morning , no so Erm , I've leftNONMET my bags at mums .
Oh dear .
laugh .
No , workingNONMET till twelve .
Oh , it Yeah Yeah Oh wow .
No .
SeemsNONMET like laugh laugh why you likeNONMET you likeNONMET to ThankNONMET you darling Yeah alright , I'm off next week That's that one , yeah , , yeah , oh and , Ann , Ann that's Yeah , John's already decided , that's alright .
Yeah yeah that's lovely , we did putNONMET in for some in February , we have this one in the we haven't gotNONMET a cover that one .
We'll have to have one less Oh , sorry Women on there have to comeMET off oh no , hangMET on , no There's four days on now .
We'll have the Wednesday off when you crossMET Yeah they haven't actually February , she would of done , but be the same , decideNONMET on the Monday , so you'll have to cancelNONMET the Wednesday then .
cancelNONMET the Wednesday , cancelNONMET Wednesday , yeah , that will keepMET the days and Thanks dear , Yeah , can you putMET me down , the name down for the , alright , okay .
Right , thankNONMET you very much John ThankNONMET you , bye now order my Hello Hello what the , have to oh yes Yeah , must be usedNONMET to the must do it sometime Well at least you're not a Er , were movingMET and one thing and another , there's so much to do .
Oh is there ?
Anyway I saidNONMET to I saidNONMET I leftNONMET today , I laugh .
That's the trouble when your at work and you got all Yeah it must be You gotMET ta be at work .
Yeah do they ?
Oh I No , no , I comeNONMET in the car , I was comingNONMET on the bus when I had this bloke next door doing some work like , I used to goNONMET out with him years ago , so he comeNONMET in and had a cup of tea , I saidNONMET , comeNONMET in about half past eleven laugh wentNONMET home at one , he comeNONMET Hello girls Hello Stuart , are you alright ?
Mm .
Oh .
Better laugh he's gotNONMET , he saidNONMET he'd be better at ten o'clock .
Yes , I'll be better at ten o'clock , I shall be better at ten o'clock by Friday laugh I du n noNONMET who shall be the worst Yes .
for the third of January , then he goes back tenth cos his Bloody hell , hello Dawn .
Hello .
Good morning .
Yeah I had somebody come round and stuck their bloody laugh No Yeah , I did , so I have Right then dear .
Yeah right as I'm gonNONMET na be for the time That's it in it ?
Hello Mr and Mrs Jean How are you ?
Very well thankNONMET you .
Good , good , good .
is it in here ?
Yes , Key , giveNONMET us key .
is she ?
No , but gettingMET Might as well sit down for a few minutes mightn't we ?
Yeah , we gotMET five minutes .
.
.
.
They never gotMET here , I was all morning .
but when you comeNONMET and sitNONMET here at night Have you not been well Jo ?
Life's not Was he , oh er , what was that did you eatNONMET something what you Du n noNONMET , Oh .
laugh Yeah , I'm goingNONMET in as well darling .
Fine .
.
Ta , seeNONMET you later on .
SeeNONMET you later on yeah , about er about the usual time Yeah , usual time .
time .
Hi ya Hello Sound cheesed off , what's the matter ?
I'm cheesed off laugh .
So am I , fed up , bored .
eating goNONMET back and goNONMET back and takeNONMET when you goNONMET back .
Fed up , cheesed off Yes Oh yes , joinMET you all I've gotNONMET I hopeNONMET laugh .
Yeah .
laugh Why you cheesed off This is strong That's the way I feelMET , am I not allowedNONMET ?
What , no , I thoughtNONMET there might be a reason yeah but , I'm on the P D C and it's it's goingMET and the phones six baskets about twenty baskets to be checked minutes Should of been done any way .
laugh Should of been done hadn't it ?
Yeah .
It only , pushingNONMET out the lastsNONMET , line , just emptied the line and he walkedNONMET in .
She doesn't stoopMET in and They didn't do any , they did one thou oh two thousand pounds each and one thousand of that was sovereign Me and reckonMET that up in the canteen .
They just useNONMET to restMET of it , yesterday , didn't I , last night .
All Dave's flavours were done apart from the odd few extras , No , I done that .
they had , all they was the roast roast its all the frozen people's fault I can't spoonful .
SeeNONMET , I don't botherNONMET .
and roast puddings , roast tikka twice and a few extras .
many people .
so Well we couldn't so I don't knowNONMET .
it was a big pub , oh yes .
I du n noNONMET what's up I just , that closing date's tomorrow in n it ?
Mm .
last week when we were on holiday .
Think up a good think for sponsor .
It seemsNONMET a funny day though .
Yeah well she's gotNONMET to startNONMET tomorrow laugh tryNONMET .
Whatever It's up laugh SoundsNONMET like .
No , I've never heardNONMET that before , putMET your name down for your Christmas lunch I would of thoughtNONMET it had been easier to erm to putMET down the name of Mm .
oh there what you wantNONMET what you wantNONMET , Could be a , now .
What was it last year was on Thursday ?
have it tea time Oh , we , probably have it about five o'clock everybody , and Lyn and Michael comeNONMET in early and have theirs as well .
.
ThinkNONMET later , be about five o'clock or quarter to five , or something like that dependsNONMET when it's on , have to comeNONMET in early if they wantNONMET to have it with us .
We'll tryNONMET one to one .
Of course gotNONMET to cookNONMET so , depending on it will be about five o'clock so that they can getNONMET washedMET up .
Probably .
I'll tellNONMET her not to cookNONMET .
Yeah , well Any thing pastry you knowNONMET , .
I cookNONMET for Stuart and I don't eatNONMET it .
I don't , I cookNONMET for Stuart , but I don't eatNONMET it .
So I meanNONMET , I still cook for Stuart , he still eatsNONMET , even though I don't have it , .
I couldn't .
No , no , not when it comesMET to pastry , a nice bit of apple pie and Oh yeah laugh , yeah .
MindNONMET you , when we were over What they gonNONMET na , what they gonNONMET na by the pound ?
No , you wanNONMET na pound .
What they doing another sponsored slim are they ?
I wishedNONMET I'd of done when I lostMET all my weight And we're gonNONMET na do it , for , for a when I lostMET my six and a half stone mammogram thing for the hospital .
What are they doing , having another one , what Wisbech or the one at No , no , we just boughtNONMET it up Yes , I thinkNONMET it Well it will be the local hospital that does all that They've gotNONMET one at cos I meanNONMET I wentNONMET and had one so there must be one , another one No , it's I thinkNONMET , unless it for , it must be for Wisbech It might be for Wisbech one , they've goneNONMET to , cos erm , I meanNONMET they've gotMET two at Lynn , so it must be Wisbech So its probably Ah Just makeMET sure you squeezeNONMET their knickers off , makeMET them laugh would you ?
I probably comeNONMET on with , on , on , on you with it after Christmas as well cos I'll probably putNONMET some back  on Yeah , we'll do it for three months over Christmas .
three months It will takeMET me bleeding years to reachMET my goal Why I've been , it will be ten months that's all Rita , ten month it tookMET me to loseMET six stone , you don't wantNONMET to loseMET that much do you ?
Yeah , Tina can goNONMET on it .
What ?
You're goingMET on a sponsored slim Sponsored slim after Christmas , er and Val and me No , goingNONMET on holiday It's for a good she's goingNONMET on holiday in January laugh You'll have all them warriors chasingNONMET you round the jungle laugh , they have their little blow pipes laugh Yeah , ooh , all them dingle danglesNONMET yeah laugh they're not , they're not little either , I sawNONMET a film and it was hangingNONMET past his knee caps laugh laugh good to useNONMET them for swingingNONMET in the trees .
laugh That's in it .
No , that's what everybody thoughtNONMET laugh laugh blush then .
Yeah laugh Trade you in for a couple of camels , he'd comeNONMET home with a couple of camels Yeah .
I laugh She'll , she'll thinkNONMET that's an elephant's trunk in her pocket and she won't realizeNONMET laugh laugh .
laugh you ain't blushedNONMET like that for a long while have you ?
laugh , yeah , that will be a holiday , watchNONMET your camp bed don't foldNONMET up love laugh laugh I sayNONMET , I'd laugh , I'm only tellingNONMET you what to expectNONMET you knowNONMET , when you goNONMET on holiday Been there Eh ?
Mm , you watchedNONMET I've been there , yeah .
You wanNONMET na watchNONMET them old mowmows yeah , they comeNONMET there with their little carving knives , yeah , cutNONMET all the dangly bits off laugh that , that's right though in n it , shut up you tellNONMET her .
.
shut up .
It's impossible .
They getNONMET them little knives You be Yeah , I've had an away day today laugh , I never saidNONMET a gay day , I saidNONMET an away day laugh .
You finishedNONMET eating ?
Why , what you gonNONMET na buyNONMET me ?
What ?
laugh You done ?
why what you speakNONMET to me , what were you sayingNONMET ?
That erm Well for You should of saidNONMET well alright , I'll takeNONMET them away then tookNONMET them right away then , TakeMET a bit of interest , what's goingMET on Somebody MakeMET the most of it .
Just letNONMET her do it .
Yeah , I've gotNONMET another weight watcher's order form , four , .
lookNONMET as though you bookNONMET it then Yeah , you don't wantNONMET to don't miss out on any thing do you ?
She's gotNONMET ta eatNONMET .
GotNONMET to eatNONMET Chips , fish Yeah and you feelNONMET like a bleeding rabbit .
Yeah , you getNONMET bored .
Especially when you have to have a bit of salad cream on laugh Well I don't feelNONMET Fair enough , I thinkNONMET I workMET She's investing it for her laugh .
Yeah , I What now ?
, You , gettingNONMET all putNONMET some back in , I needNONMET some by six o'clock , I saidNONMET comesNONMET at six thirty , you can't have it we're bloody cooking , any way I though you done John's saidNONMET his got because comeMET on .
John's toldNONMET me to tellNONMET you to goNONMET and getNONMET it , right I saidNONMET I saidNONMET Richard coming , for four hundred pound I you're not comingNONMET for it so that's it oh you thinkNONMET it was pub machine or laugh .
well if it isn't , well what can you do ?
I can't makeMET the machine goMET any bloody quicker , well I can , but I so what's the point in that comeNONMET and have a look at it and then they saidNONMET comeNONMET back and do it when you on the skin , you knowNONMET the skin bringNONMET it forward well it don't goNONMET back , it just getsNONMET all tangled .
He comeNONMET in Saturday , not that he , we've heardNONMET all that before , saidNONMET that you can getNONMET giveMET it a good wash and squeezeNONMET it back , that I can't putNONMET one on now , giveMET me a ring when you're done laugh , so we've been doing a few need a good wash Monday's the twenty third , Sunday's the twenty second nothing to do with , he stoodNONMET there , he saidNONMET , it's not workingMET , and he paidNONMET the bloody bill I putNONMET them on right .
Same old story gettingMET it underneath cos they're goingNONMET higher up and underneath last week , we ought to goNONMET Oh yeah , yeah .
Didn't tellNONMET us about that one did you ?
Everyone startsNONMET on me what's happenNONMET with the .
They haven't mentionedNONMET it this year , have they ?
No , Have they ?
Yeah , Yeah , but last year laugh Oh we were waitingNONMET and waitingNONMET in the end we gotNONMET in the car .
Oh we're being I was gonNONMET na driveNONMET anyway We'll be at mum's anyway , so I takeNONMET I takeNONMET , only occasionally I goNONMET mad and letNONMET ripe and have quite a few , other times I just be on an orange juice and lemonade but the other , the other do I really madeNONMET Pardon ?
You've been to seeNONMET him haven't you ?
How is he ?
laugh Be alright ?
Well the two er three days , I've askedNONMET Dave Mm , mm .
Did he knowNONMET you were goingNONMET ?
Yeah .
Dates from the last day of , not too bad .
At least you keepMET in touch , some of them getNONMET shovedMET away and they never , nobody don't botherNONMET with them do they ?
the worst yeah Yeah and its cost us forty two ticket up Pardon ?
on what tickets ?
Well , like I sayNONMET if I wantNONMET to bringNONMET my family , I've gotMET to payNONMET five pound which Five pound , yeah yeah .
GoNONMET and getNONMET nine tickets , or I startNONMET right up all the bloody year round for that .
Well , that's what I saidNONMET .
Yeah , we payNONMET all the year round for that don't we and that's all we bloody getNONMET out of it .
I meanNONMET it's When my Helen comesNONMET , she's gotNONMET ta payNONMET No , you have Yeah , I already toldNONMET that .
Why it is , it's very , very , very wrong , sayNONMET we payNONMET all year round for that , I've paidNONMET for a year for my ticket Nobody askedNONMET for my clock number when mine and Stuart's , just gaveNONMET me me ticket .
You've just gotNONMET to giveNONMET , you knowNONMET , we've put by and we saidNONMET .
Nobody putNONMET , nobody askedNONMET for mine or Stuart's it's just When , when I wentNONMET to getNONMET my tickets she saidNONMET I had eight pickingMET me at half past seven tonight love .
Oh yeah .
Yes .
And then we'll goNONMET for a drink first and then we'll goNONMET to the Indian restaurant .
Right .
Our Carl wantedNONMET to knowNONMET what , why you were goingNONMET ?
Did he ?
Yeah .
What did he sayNONMET ?
He saidNONMET oh , he saidNONMET , what are they celebratingNONMET ?
I saidNONMET nothing !
Well he saidNONMET well it seemsNONMET funny they're going out doesn't it ?
Well I saidNONMET , well as far as I knowNONMET , I saidNONMET nothing , they're not celebratingNONMET anything .
Should have saidNONMET to him , you never take dad out for a curry so Kevin's goingNONMET .
Tt .
Oh Gordon !
He has taken you out .
Yeah , about four years ago ?
You're very ungrateful !
Well he's taken us out when they've been to bloody shop workingNONMET and come back and wa I admittedMET that , but I meanNONMET just to go out for an evening .
I meanNONMET , he never saysNONMET to me go and have a , do you wanNONMET na goNONMET for a pint or wanNONMET na goNONMET for a curry or owt does he ?
No .
Well we don't seeNONMET him much now do we ?
Well , I'm not , I'm not botheredNONMET about it .
It doesn't worryMET me .
Well who wantsNONMET to go out with a doddery old bugger like me anyway !
laugh Surprised Kevin wantsNONMET to , surprised Kevin wantsNONMET to goNONMET .
Well it's Could go on to   the rugby and goNONMET with them couldn't he ?
Well Eh ?
yeah .
Instead of a doddering old bugger like who's miserable !
Well well he hasn't gotMET a father so he regardsMET you doesn't he ?
If you wanNONMET na takeMET it that way .
radio on If if Labour say getMET in if Labour getMET in and they can't fulfilNONMET their promises Yes .
like John Smith's madeMET promises then that Conservatives haven't done this , that and the other , he must be able to do them now mustn't he ?
Who must ?
John Smith .
Well erm , they , they don't knowNONMET whether they can do it or not do they ?
No , but he's criticizingNONMET the Conservative policies and all that , and what we will do is this .
I knowNONMET for investment Yes but they all sayNONMET that industry don't they until they getMET into power ?
I knowNONMET .
And the and then they all They do .
Back down .
They do .
Yeah .
They'll sayNONMET they , they probably haven't gotMET the finances to backMET up what they what they saidNONMET they would do .
Yeah but a lo a lot of quotes gonNONMET na be madeMET to them after aren't there ?
You knowNONMET , like you saidNONMET this and you haven't done it , you saidNONMET that and you haven't done it and all that sort of .
Yes but once they're in power there's nothing you Well can do about it .
oh admittedly no .
No .
But they must feelMET a bit stupid to er Well I can't well I meanNONMET there's an awful lot , I meanNONMET would , no , no matter which political party it is , they all makeMET promises , but they don't carry them all out .
No .
Course not .
But I meanNONMET these are , these are major things .
GettingMET the economy right .
Now John Smith But er well John may have we'll getMET the economy right .
Now if he doesn't getMET the economy right he's gonNONMET na end up with egg on his face and Of course he is .
But you tellNONMET me how just how is he goingNONMET to do it ?
I meanNONMET , ee , they don't explainNONMET to you how they're goingNONMET to do it do they ?
No .
They , they just come out wi a er With statements .
glibly with these , these statements .
Mm .
Mm .
I'm sure that e e if there is an easy way of doing it the Conservatives would have found out and done it .
I don't thinkNONMET there's any any easy way .
I don't seeMET how they're goingNONMET to do it .
No .
I really don't .
I meanNONMET where are they goingNONMET , where are they goingNONMET to getMET the extra money from er to payNONMET for the old  aged  pensioners ' er eight pound rise ?
Mm .
Or so they sayNONMET , we'll getMET eight pound .
Somebody's gotNONMET to payNONMET for it .
So it'll be the working people , er , probably the the national er , health stamp'll have to go , go up .
It'll be a sorry day if they getMET in .
It will Gordon .
laugh Oh !
I don't knowNONMET .
You're a real turncoat you are .
Mm .
Aren't you ?
Mm .
I was listening today to erm a man on the radio and he was only thirty four and he had a stroke and they were sayingNONMET he , they er , they were askingNONMET him , they saidNONMET well how did it happenNONMET ?
They saidNONMET , did you have any warning ?
And he saidNONMET no .
None at all he saidNONMET .
I was gardeningNONMET and he saidNONMET er er I bentNONMET over to do something and he saidNONMET I just went dizzy , he saidNONMET , and I fell over he saidNONMET and then I realizedNONMET my right side was paralysed .
And he saidNONMET I was completely confused and I couldn't , he saidNONMET I was tryingNONMET to shoutNONMET my wife and erm and , er , you knowNONMET my mouth wouldn't workMET , he saidNONMET , but she saidNONMET fortunately she lookedNONMET through the window and er foundNONMET him and they tookNONMET him to hospital .
And they were sayingNONMET , they were sayingNONMET that , you knowNONMET , you associateNONMET strokes with older people , but there's a hundred young people a week have strokes !
Tt .
Aye .
And he saidNONMET erm like it's the clots to your brains that erm that cause it , you knowNONMET .
They saidNONMET , well did you have any warning about it ?
And he saidNONMET er , no , he saidNONMET I didn't thinkNONMET I had he saidNONMET , but now , he saidNONMET I realizedNONMET that how I , was forgettingNONMET er I'd be talkingNONMET and I'd forgetNONMET sort of what I was just talkingNONMET about that split second .
Mm .
And now the stroke has affectedNONMET him that way .
He can be talkingNONMET , say about a well , you knowNONMET , about any er , about sa say a , a video recorder or something like that Mm .
and for a minute he can forgetNONMET that he's talkingNONMET about it .
Mm .
You knowNONMET , but erm he sa he's recoveredNONMET reasonably well in the same , you knowNONMET , but GotMET his use very back ?
er , partly back .
Partly back .
Not fully .
You knowNONMET .
Thirty four !
I knowNONMET !
I meanNONMET you just don't you don't imagineNONMET that do you really ?
No .
It's terrible !
But a hundred young people a week !
I meanNONMET , I , I couldn't believeNONMET it when they were sayingNONMET that .
That's terrible !
It is .
It's an awful thing .
SeeMET I've never , I've never across anyone that like knowNONMET you .
What do you meanNONMET ?
Well I've knownNONMET anyone to be five years and no use whatsoever .
Ah well , and Aun I meanNONMET Aunty Lilly was like that Gordon .
She never gotMET her use back and she never spokeNONMET again .
Yeah but she didn't , well she didn't liveNONMET  long after her stroke did she ?
Oh she did , you knowNONMET .
Er , not as Mind , she was in bed all the time .
Oh she was in bed all the time .
Yes .
How  long did she liveNONMET after the stroke ?
Only months weren't it ?
Oh no !
Oh no !
It wasn't months Gordon .
No .
I meanNONMET she was in Park Hospital for so  long and then she was transferredNONMET to a nursing home in Thornton .
Er do yo don't you rememberNONMET us ta takingNONMET Iris and Ian down to seeNONMET her ?
I didn't seeNONMET her did I ?
No we didn't goNONMET in , but Iris and Ian did .
Did he ?
Yes .
Well I , I , we , I , I droveNONMET them there .
You was with me .
Yeah ?
Yes !
Well I reckonMET she livedNONMET er a couple of years after the stroke Gordon .
I meanNONMET , and she was in a terrible , I meanNONMET she couldn't even speakNONMET !
No .
I meanNONMET , er erm and I wentNONMET to seeNONMET her in Park Hospital and she was very frustrat very frustrated because she couldn't speakNONMET .
No .
What was she doing in Park Hospital ?
She tookMET ill at Aunty Edith's .
Well was it Edith's ?
Yeah .
I th I thinkNONMET they'd been on holiday and , she tookMET ill on the holiday and , and cameNONMET erm , she was stoppingNONMET at erm , Edith's and er it happenedNONMET then .
Well , you knowNONMET , I can't recallMET any of this .
Yes .
Did we , we goNONMET to Edith's to seeNONMET her then did we not ?
No , but I wentNONMET to Park Hospital to seeNONMET her .
Because Edith now Edith was goingNONMET away for some unknown reason , I don't knowNONMET , she must have been goingNONMET on another holiday anyhow .
No , she was in Park Hospital a long time .
That was it , because Edith was goingNONMET on another holiday and she was er , she wantedNONMET someone to goNONMET and visitNONMET er Lilly , and I saidNONMET well I'll goNONMET .
And I , I , it was when I had my own car and I droveNONMET there .
And I wantedNONMET to seeNONMET her .
She was very , very frustrated cos she couldn't speakNONMET .
Mm !
And she couldn't write anything down .
I don't thinkNONMET you sawNONMET her actually .
I don't thinkNONMET I did .
I never recallMET seeingNONMET her when she was ill .
Never .
No .
No .
Well you must have been goingNONMET during the day while I was at work then .
No , it was night time I wentNONMET , cos I was workingNONMET .
Well why in the bloody hell I didn't goNONMET then ?
Why didn't I goNONMET with you ?
I don't knowNONMET .
Was it night school or something like that , or what ?
I don't knowNONMET .
I thinkNONMET you we d' ya knowNONMET I thinkNONMET you were at night school Gordon when I thinkNONMET about it .
I thinkNONMET you were teachingNONMET at night school .
It must have been something I was doing .
No !
I knowNONMET why Gordon .
Because the ba the children were small .
Yo one of us had to stay in .
Oh yes .
Aye , that's right .
Of course , yes .
You knowNONMET , I meanNONMET , they were only small .
Aye , that's right .
Did we liveNONMET in Ashton Lane then ?
Erm no , we were here .
Were we ?
Yes .
Well I didn't have my own car in Ashton Lane .
No you didn't .
That's right .
So we was here .
Well , about nineteen seventy then , seventy one .
No you gotNONMET your licence in erm was it , it were early in the year when you passedMET your test ?
Yes I thinkNONMET it was .
Well it were seventy one .
Mm .
Cos didn't you phoneNONMET me at Lillycups to tellNONMET me ?
Yes I thinkNONMET I did .
Yes .
Yes .
Well I was only at Lillycups from August seventy till August seventy one .
Yes .
Only a year .
And if you phonedNONMET me early in the year it must have been just after we gotNONMET the V W. Yes .
I thinkNONMET it was .
clears throat Just a couple So of months after we gotNONMET that clears throat I thinkNONMET it was because er th cos we'd gotNONMET Iris ' er er Triumph didn't we ?
That's right .
Yes .
Soon after that .
Yes .
I thinkNONMET we did Gordon .
And you were drivingNONMET that about .
That's right .
That's right .
Well Carl hadn't passedMET And you wentNONMET , you wentNONMET in that Triumph did you to the I did .
Yes .
Well it's ser te it was later than seventy one you seeMET .
Mm .
And you had that car about two years didn't you ?
Oh yes .
Perhaps a bit  longer .
Two years ?
Yeah .
Because I cameNONMET , I cameNONMET to er Dellasel Yeah .
when Carl passedMET his er , to M G S. Yeah .
Do you rememberNONMET ?
Yeah .
Blimey !
Do you meanNONMET , must be about twenty years ago then ?
Yes .
Yeah about twenty .
This is why you knowNONMET , I , I thinkNONMET you should keepMET di I keepMET diaries from years ago because I knowNONMET you don't likeNONMET nostalgia , and I don't , but it's interesting Mm mm .
to look up .
Yes .
Er , events .
Yes .
I meanNONMET I've gotNONMET no diaries datingNONMET back that long .
No , I knowNONMET .
Well I haven't .
I have no record of anything No .
happening then .
No .
But just one line of things that you knowNONMET , I don't meanNONMET a diary where you writeNONMET a page every night , but just two lines you knowNONMET .
Yeah .
All , and what you did and when I gotNONMET the car , the date and when you gotNONMET that Triumph then .
Yeah .
You knowNONMET , little , just a line .
And then when you lookNONMET at it er ca you can recallMET then Oh yes .
other things .
That's right .
The one line sort of sets it all off , you can rememberNONMET .
That's right .
Yeah .
Mm .
Yes but I rememberNONMET , I can rememberNONMET Edith phoningNONMET me and , and sayingNONMET , you knowNONMET she was goingNONMET away , you knowNONMET is , you knowNONMET could I goNONMET down ?
And I saidNONMET yes .
Mm .
I , cos I rememberNONMET coming , coming back , I got lost .
You knowNONMET where er that circle is where there's the shops , well instead of takingMET I knowNONMET , instead of takingMET one road I tookMET another and I gotNONMET completely lostMET !
Mm .
Mm .
I wouldn't now , but then I , I , I didn't knowNONMET er round that area .
No that's right really , I meanNONMET if you don't knowNONMET the area you don't knowNONMET which road to takeMET on the islands .
I knowNONMET .
But I meanNONMET , you wouldn't have thoughtNONMET that Ed er Lilly , I meanNONMET , she had no weight on her or anything like No .
that did she ?
No .
She's always been active all her life .
All , been active all her life .
No , you can't understandNONMET how these things happenNONMET .
Well they giveMET you all these bloody tips and papers about what to do , to avoidMET this and avoidMET that .
And what to eatNONMET and everything but This bloody footballer , I meanNONMET it's a I knowNONMET !
a really fit man .
I knowNONMET .
He's , er , one artery was seventy percent blocked , it was in the paper .
Yeah .
And the other artery was ninety percent blocked .
Was it really ?
Yeah !
Yeah !
Good God !
I meanNONMET , he could have goneMET an any time .
Graham Sounness , I meanNONMET he's only thirty eight !
Could have goneMET any time with with nothing through his bloody arteries !
Good God !
But that's incred I didn't knowNONMET it was that bad .
It was in the paper this morning .
And er Goodness me !
Well he's a , he , he didn't smokeNONMET .
No .
He was an athlete .
He's been an athlete .
He obviously ateNONMET like everybody else .
Mm .
And he I meanNONMET wasn't overweight in any way .
Wasn't overweight , what more No .
the bloody hell do you have to do !
That's incredible that !
SeeMET they sayNONMET it was a ma it's hereditary .
Well Cos his father had a bypass didn't he ?
Oh did he ?
I thinkNONMET some other relative diedNONMET er Oh .
youngish .
Yes .
Oh well I betMET , I thinkNONMET perhaps it is really .
radio on break in tape I knowNONMET .
It's still goingMET ?
I knowNONMET .
Yeah , and you can't , you can't understandNONMET it can you really ?
Well lookMET at the old lady that walksNONMET past here at ninety one !
That's right , yeah .
Yeah .
And she does all her own shopping .
Mm .
You knowNONMET , I meanNONMET , she keepsNONMET stoppingNONMET but she's , she's remarkable !
She really is .
Mm .
But they're few and far between aren't they ?
When th you're like that .
Yeah .
Mm .
But what I couldn't understandNONMET with this Soun this fella that This Sounness ?
Aye .
He , he found out cos he wentNONMET for , to , for a check up and they tookMET his blood pressure .
Yes .
And tha well lots of people goNONMET and have blood pressure takenMET , they findMET it's high , and they Yes .
giveNONMET them tablets .
Yes .
GoNONMET home .
Why did they takeMET it a stage further with him ?
He'd gotMET high blood pressure , he wasn't in any pain he's livingNONMET a normal life .
Similar to what I was when I wentNONMET .
Yes .
And they just giveNONMET me tablets .
Yes .
Now why , what madeMET them takeMET it to the stage Well er well , first where , he wantedNONMET a heart bypass ?
first and foremost he was in a private scheme .
Well , pro probably that's it then .
Yeah .
A and probably because i because of his father and er the rela the other relative having the bypasses done .
So they tookMET it Mm .
a step further , but I thinkNONMET probably , it's because he was in er er a private scheme .
Very likely in n it ?
Yes .
So there's a lot of people walkingNONMET about with just takingNONMET bloody tablets who probably really should have a by bypass .
Ah well I , well , laugh I wouldn't sayNONMET that really Gordon .
I meanNONMET I thinkNONMET er , when your blood pressure was found out and you'd been takingNONMET tablets ever , so , I thinkNONMET it's keptMET it all under control and you've , you , we eatNONMET a sensible diet .
The only , the only er thing I complainedNONMET about with you is , is the butter .
Mm .
I don't have that much now .
But I thinkNONMET everything in moderation , but you don't eatNONMET as much butter now as what you used to .
I don't eatNONMET that much bread you seeMET .
No .
So I , I thinkNONMET really , and I thinkNONMET what I thinkNONMET with him , I thinkNONMET definitely I thinkNONMET it must be the private scheme and plus that his own family , it runsMET in the family .
Mm mm .
Must be hell of a shock being toldNONMET Oh God !
It must have been .
SeeMET how much it's costingNONMET ?
Two hundred and fifty pounds a night !
Yeah .
Phworgh !
That's without the operation .
Yeah .
Well he earnedNONMET three hundred and fifty thousand a year then .
Oh I knowNONMET .
And plus he's , he , he , he , he married an heiress you knowNONMET .
Did he ?
Er him er , sh they liveNONMET in Spain now .
Oh er he , he's worth a pretty penny is Sounness .
He wentNONMET in Carl's shop the other , the other week .
Did he ?
Yes !
Mm .
Must have been lookingNONMET for a house .
Carl saidNONMET he , he lookedNONMET er well er , his face did , it were very he's gotNONMET a very poxy skin .
Has he ?
You kno mm .
Yes .
He was having it done this afternoon weren't he ?
Yeah .
Some time today .
Aye .
I tellNONMET you what , that's quick int it though Gordon ?
With only goingNONMET in last night and Mm .
having it done today .
It is indeed .
We I wonderNONMET how quick they would have gotNONMET him in though if he wouldn't have been in a private scheme .
He could waitNONMET six months couldn't he ?
Well he could have been dead by then .
Well er , yeah , e exactly that's what they're moaningNONMET about int it ?
Terrible !
PutMET them on a list and wait .
I've never heardNONMET so much talk about health as we do nowadays .
Oh I knowNONMET .
When I was young I co I don't rememberNONMET talkingNONMET all the time about bloody health and what you should do and what you shouldn't do .
No I knowNONMET .
Did you ?
No .
But we weren't educatedNONMET in , in , in health though .
We just li we just livedNONMET and that was the end of it .
Yes but then you seeMET , in the ol in the old days Gordon , I meanNONMET , you we you were very fortunate if you got three meals a day and i and whatever you gotNONMET you were glad of and used to eatNONMET it all .
Now we're much more affluent and people are educated we er Mm .
as regards their health .
Mhm .
Well th having saidNONMET that Gordon , your mother livedNONMET to a good old age , and my mum , and my father did .
Yeah .
And they ateNONMET all the wrong stuff didn't they ?
According to wha according to what they sayNONMET now they did .
Mm .
I knowNONMET .
Don't knowNONMET who to believeNONMET really .
When you lookMET at , when you lookMET at the some , all these , a lot of these composers and artists who diedNONMET long ago and you lookMET the birth range there's a hell of a lot at seventy five , seventy six Yes .
a oh there's a few at forty odd .
Mm .
But there's a hell of a lot well into their seventies .
You knowNONMET , and they were bornNONMET early eighteen hundreds .
Yes .
Yes .
Yeah .
I knowNONMET .
I knowNONMET we're livingNONMET  longer now generally but I wonderNONMET how much I don't knowNONMET I I wonderNONMET you knowNONMET how much , how much , I don't really knowNONMET .
Cos there's more people now than there was in those days .
Yeah , there's a lot more people .
It's not anyhow , I meanNONMET , it's alright living  longer if you , if you , if you've gotMET all your faculties .
Mm .
And you've gotMET good health and everything .
It's no use living like a cabbage , I don't thinkNONMET so anyhow .
No , that's And when I seeNONMET these people in nursing homes all satNONMET round a wall in chairs oh God !
I'd hateNONMET to end up like that .
Somebody's .
Pardon ?
Left the gate open .
Did you ?
I wonderNONMET who's that ?
I'll checkNONMET .
Has a leaflet  comeNONMET through .
Yes .
I betMET there has .
TellNONMET you what , the Conservative candidate's not been round has he ?
No he daren't .
laugh That , I orderedNONMET that one .
Mm .
That one ?
Well , but it's only er er record book .
You were sayingNONMET How did the bar goMET ?
Don't knowNONMET .
Just tryingNONMET to Have you gotNONMET any ?
Don't be sil don't be silly !
The ultimate collection of your favourite .
You have to makeMET one order .
You could can't be far off nine hundred then ?
Six ?
I've never seenMET a Saturday goMET so fast .
Yeah it well I , comeMET on !
Anything goesMET fast after Friday .
Yeah .
It's not so much that it Seven fifty .
Two two pound fifty .
Just over .
MindNONMET you , I thoughtNONMET oh yeah .
Two hundred people .
I So two hundred paidNONMET tonight ?
No .
About hundred and eighty paid .
FeelsMET like a hundred and fifty and getNONMET out of it .
Yeah .
Twenty fi I meanNONMET last week there was a hundred sixty in and that was actually up on the previous couple of weeks , just Mm .
in er Oh yeah .
Wasn't it ?
Yeah .
Well I meanNONMET , January It is gettingMET quite people are gettingMET paidNONMET again .
gettingMET paidNONMET again .
People have gotNONMET some money again .
I du n noNONMET , I , I , I thinkNONMET the Friday nights , mostly on the Friday nights .
Yeah , might well do .
Might well do .
Please can I have my twenty five I'm owedNONMET for like two weeks ?
Oh right .
Two weeks .
Well I don't , mine's gotNONMET ta goMET in the cleaners Yeah , well Oh I needNONMET some I have to clean them up , I'll have to Yeah I knowNONMET .
takeNONMET it to the cleaners I knowNONMET , I might getNONMET some so it's not the fucking cleaner .
I'm gonNONMET na getNONMET some cleaning , I'll getNONMET some cleaning fluid this week .
You knowNONMET which one it , it is , it sort of activatedNONMET one .
Erm You're gonNONMET na killNONMET somebody one day you knowNONMET usingNONMET that !
Bloody .
I giveMET them a , I did giveMET them a good rinse afterwards though .
It's gonNONMET na have to It was it's gonNONMET na have to be erm erm dub dub wurgh wurgh erm tt I can getMET a delivery on Thursday , I needNONMET , we needNONMET a delivery on Thursday anyway It , yes .
when we're open so I'll getMET a delivery on Thursday and I'll getNONMET some er Well I'll do the delivery if you wantNONMET cleaner I'll do the delivery when I've bit of cleaner .
Okay .
Yeah , so that's an , an idea for Glasses .
Yeah , we runMET out pints again tonight .
Well we didn't runMET out , we runMET out but there was quite a few outside in the I should hopeNONMET so !
I knowNONMET , but I'm loathed to give them out .
No .
Unless I knowNONMET who's gettingNONMET them .
Mm .
Seventy five where are on now ?
Ten And black Ashley cameMET in .
Yeah .
I thoughtNONMET Laura was comingNONMET behind the bar to fuckingNONMET us support .
I knowNONMET what Laura was What ?
drinking .
She walkedNONMET behind the bar , gotNONMET herself a drink and wentNONMET and fucking satNONMET and watchedNONMET us !
Mm !
Oh !
Oh !
The little pratt Obnoxious dickhead !
Yeah .
yeah but he saidNONMET Oh yeah , he was legless all night weren't he ?
I gotMET him every time , until the end and I saidNONMET I am not servingNONMET him this time !
laugh Hughey , you serveNONMET him !
Well that's right .
Cos he was absolutely incapable of talkingNONMET Yes .
let alone givingNONMET any money .
And I saidNONMET it's alright we're still in Have you ever seenNONMET him judge from their looks you knowNONMET what they're drinkingNONMET and you just likeNONMET goMET vaguely wavingNONMET his empty glass Well you should takeNONMET his glass and you fillNONMET it and takeNONMET the money out their hand don't you ?
Yeah .
D' ya thinkNONMET so ?
Yep .
Yeah the , ye oh yeah , honestly yeah .
I wo I would have done tonight those but Oh yeah talkingNONMET to Alan .
InterruptedMET by customers .
Mm .
No I was er talkingNONMET to , is it Alan ?
Security guard .
Aren't you the lucky one !
Well he's better than Stuart !
Just !
I'm sayingNONMET nothing !
Well , yeah , but I meanNONMET the stories they tellNONMET about fishing so they're different stories Oh yeah .
and we caughtNONMET a Yeah .
whereas er He doesn't lieNONMET to his wife any more .
I have been , I have been in my time !
Coarse fishing though , he was sea fishing , sea fishing .
sigh When are you gonNONMET na giveNONMET up smoking and saveNONMET some I knowNONMET .
money ?
You could payNONMET your mortgage on what you smoked !
I don't giveMET a fuck !
laugh It's a foolish fucking !
laugh I can't with my habits any more .
Gambling and drinking .
laugh Did you winNONMET any money today ?
Only a bit .
Have you gotNONMET my keys ?
Just a wee bit .
No !
I putNONMET them Ah .
on the table .
Sorry !
I've gotNONMET my keys .
Can we not finishNONMET our drinks Barry ?
You did it likeNONMET I did it didn't you ?
Course you can finishNONMET your drinks !
GetNONMET your coat and we'll rattleNONMET it , ah , your keys are there .
Maybe I've gotNONMET a collection of these half pints at home !
I knowNONMET that .
laugh Well , bring them back !
That's where all these long thin ones have goneMET .
No , no , I useNONMET it's usually fuckedNONMET .
Why don't you just takeNONMET a case of it , one of those cases home , one of the empty empty cases ?
And bring back the glasses .
And bring all the glasses back .
laugh I'll tellNONMET you what they're .
What are ?
They do take the bottoms off them .
They don't giveMET a fuck Oh I knowNONMET !
They do takeNONMET the bottoms of them Barry .
Oh !
Well I toldNONMET you Well you seeNONMET , you actually seeNONMET tho them little punks collecting them up at the end of the night don't you ?
PuttingNONMET them under their coats like .
How , how many what did you carry out yourself ?
Tonight ?
Yeah .
Five bottoms .
Well that's Well that half a case .
And I soldNONMET four of those as well like .
Yeah .
They carryNONMET out .
And I soldNONMET three three double gin three , you knowNONMET .
Yeah but yo you always sellNONMET a few to take out don't Well that's why they broughtNONMET it .
Most probably take out and sellNONMET them what's Yeah .
left at the end of the night .
I meanNONMET , not all our customers abs are absolutely stupid .
BuyNONMET a bottle at five to two and leaveNONMET it at two o'clock .
It's the nice ones that leaveNONMET their drink there .
Mm !
I'm amazed they haven't Well anyway I was talkingNONMET to er Rosette tonight cos I wentNONMET to the office for some change and I , then I had this like .
She saidNONMET , I hearNONMET the Empire , or , or hearNONMET The Garden's doing well on a Friday night .
Must have heardNONMET about that from Alan .
He goesNONMET it's too fucking dead !
Well it's it , last day of week Where ?
Popping up to Christies and just after you go up the top .
No , no , no , where ?
Where are you talkingNONMET about ?
The Empire ?
But apparently they're doing quite well on a Wednesday with the students .
Students , yeah I knowNONMET .
And erm Mark was in last week he saidNONMET They're getting six hundred like .
well , Mark saidNONMET it was , Mark er guessedNONMET about four hundred .
He's , he , he wentNONMET in last week , he wentNONMET in this week and er Well Paul , Paul saidNONMET to me six hundred , about seven hundred Yeah .
normally he saidNONMET , he saidNONMET well there would be about six hundred .
Ni Nigel mentionedNONMET , he toldNONMET me it was erm er like four , five hundred in tt to Not bad though is it ?
Well it's very good in n it ?
I meanNONMET , on a Wednesday .
And it's only a quid to getNONMET in and it's a pound , pound a pint .
Two quid and , and a drink , yeah .
But on the other hand they're makingMET a little bit at a pound a pint .
Well they're makingMET five or six hundred , they're bound clears throat to be gettingNONMET on with it .
That's right .
That's getting in the laugh I don't thinkNONMET they've gotMET a lot of staff on .
I wouldn't have thoughtNONMET they'd botherNONMET with a No .
student night , having a lot of staff on , it's pointless having ah , I meanNONMET , the bouncers in that situation .
Well you'd only needNONMET one .
But we don't needNONMET a bouncer on Except , mind you , the , the rough , the erm rugby club gaveMET the band a bit of er , a rough seeing to .
What band ?
He had some band that were awful apparently and the laugh whole of the rugby team were lyingMET in front of stage with their They , they've never leftNONMET , they were playingNONMET the rugby club ?
fingers up .
laugh No , no , no , no , no .
No !
University University rugby club .
Oh !
The Uni's ?
Yeah .
Mhm .
Yeah .
The band wentMET ran off in tears apparently .
laugh Couldn't copeNONMET .
SeeingNONMET the University Rugby Club I would , I would have eh !
Mm .
Must be some narky bastards in the rugby club !
Oh !
I can't getNONMET it out it's stuck on   his collar I hopeNONMET she comesNONMET back for it next week .
But six hundred on a Wednesday night that's pretty good .
Mm .
Does the Sugar House getMET that many people in ?
No .
No .
The Sugar House only opensNONMET er Thursday , Friday , Saturday .
Or , or , o we always have done .
I meanNONMET , we we openedNONMET originally , first year , every night of the bloody week and it was pointless , absolutely pointless .
Is that bigger than the Empire ?
I've never been in it ?
Yeah .
No !
Er yeah .
Yes it is .
Is it ?
It's legal , it's legal Well it's on , it's on a Thursday , yeah .
it's it's legally bigger than the Empire but the Empire can getMET more people in cos he's gotMET upstairs and Yeah .
that Mm .
seeMET .
But , of course , erm for licensing they don't takeMET that particularly into consideration up there .
Well they half upstairs straight away .
Yeah .
Yeah .
So er I meanNONMET , I thinkNONMET , I , I thinkNONMET the Empire legally is well I thoughtNONMET it was nine hundred Seven fifty I thinkNONMET .
I can't thinkNONMET er I don't knowNONMET .
I thinkNONMET it's nine hundred .
I meanNONMET you could cer you could Well I thoughtNONMET it was seven fifty .
certainly getMET seventeen , eighteen hundred in there .
Well yeah .
Even that Bob Monkhouse opened up quite Yeah .
quite nice .
Yeah .
Well , they'll have the Garden won't they ?
Oh yeah .
MindNONMET you Probably , fucking tellNONMET by , cos there was I thoughtNONMET They we there was too many .
Yeah .
But I meanNONMET they were bangingMET they were bangingNONMET fifteen hundred in for that disco for the first Mm .
few months weren't they ?
No , twelve , twelve or thirteen .
They never had fifteen .
Didn't they ?
I meanNONMET the Sugar House , his capacity's just been uppedNONMET to eleven hundred I thinkNONMET .
Erm I meanNONMET , it was always nine hundred , but it's been uppedNONMET to eleven hundred last year I thinkNONMET .
Well we used to putMET , I meanNONMET , I putMET twelve , thirteen hundred in the Sugar House .
But tha but you it's full at that , you knowNONMET .
Mm .
Whereas the , the , the , you , you could you could , you could fitMET sixteen , seventeen hundred .
No , I reckonNONMET , th th there was , th th they reckonNONMET between a , a thousand and e eleven hundred for a night , you knowNONMET .
But you couldn't fucking moveNONMET at that .
Yeah , but it was a , it was also a ver it was a bit of a celebrity , I meanNONMET it was people , people were crushedMET around , bloody hell I meanNONMET Yeah , that's right .
, yeah .
all the downstairs , I meanNONMET all the plebs were upstairs all the downstairs was erm Yeah but , ma maybe , maybe a hundred people .
Mm .
I'm sure .
I meanNONMET , I don't knowNONMET I , you seeMET I leftNONMET I had to comeNONMET here so I leftNONMET before Bob Monkhouse and everything , I just , I , all I did was goNONMET for couple of free drinks and plate of free food , which , I don't thinkNONMET I gotNONMET .
And left .
You getNONMET a few fucking with the chef .
laugh You knowNONMET deep sea diving at laugh Yes you would .
You , you betrayedNONMET us then , you'd leftNONMET hadn't you ?
You'd leftNONMET me !
I had to leaveNONMET .
You'd fledNONMET us !
And goneNONMET to workNONMET for the opposition .
Were you op well I didn't reckonMET you were opposition .
laugh But I did goNONMET out or something .
Just cos you thoughtNONMET you were go It's funny though just cos you , you were comingNONMET out with about two hundred and fifty quid a week for workingNONMET seven nights a week !
No , I , originally , they they were open seven nights a week .
I knowNONMET .
No .
Was it four times a week ?
And you were securedNONMET weren't you securedNONMET there ?
Mm .
Oh !
Seven nights a week , two hundred and fifty in my pocket guaranteed .
GoingNONMET to bed with Jean fucking , fucking shite !
Kelly's !
laugh Christ !
Some of the schemes they come up with .
GetMET your blood goingMET .
I meanNONMET , I'll , I'll , I'll be interesting to seeNONMET how they they startNONMET next week with a a load of er bands on Thursday nights .
Mm .
I meanNONMET , they're all chartsey stuff but Mm .
you knowNONMET , I , I da that kind of stuff doesn't drawMET punters generally , chart stuff cos the people who goNONMET I du n noNONMET , I thinkNONMET the young the people who are interested I thinkNONMET the young people goNONMET to it like .
Well me yeah , maybe .
Maybe some of that will .
Yeah .
But generally pop , poppy type A lot , a lot of Top of the Pops stuff doesn't , in the sense that people who likeNONMET to goNONMET and seeMET live music don't people who like that kind of music preferNONMET the dis preferNONMET it in a Yeah .
disco context .
Yeah .
Yeah .
Not , not , seeingNONMET sort of a live concert .
Anyway In fact , in fact most of the stuff they don't likeNONMET anyway .
Mm .
True .
Well they're not lo all those appearances are P A , it's all gonNONMET na be mimed and backing tapes .
Erm that blooming Labour Party cancellingNONMET that conference on March twenty second and which has Oh yeah .
messedMET me up !
Cos I was Mary wantedNONMET to goNONMET and seeNONMET Si Simply Red at G MEX , and last weekend we co or weekend before last when they were on , their big , er we couldn't because I had the kids Friday night and the two of them Saturday night and it , that was the two nights .
Were you gonNONMET na goNONMET with her ?
Yeah .
So , so so I saidNONMET well we'll goNONMET to the N E C or Sheffi she saidNONMET oh I'm not traipsingNONMET all that way , you knowNONMET , just for the concert .
So and she was , she was moaningMET away like sort of oh we alright !
I'll takeNONMET you over to Paris and we'll watchNONMET them in Paris on the twenty so she saidNONMET , oh when ?
So I saidNONMET , twentieth of March .
She saidNONMET oh !
Tt .
Oh !
Ah !
The Labour Party Conference is on so I can't goNONMET .
So I saidNONMET laugh oh dear me !
Yeah .
laugh And then she cameMET in , oh , Labour Party Conference is cancelled !
Oh bugger !
Mm .
You seeNONMET Jean on the telly with Neil Kinnock ?
No .
No , I've been toldNONMET about it .
When ?
Ee , er , Friday .
It's on all the national news .
It wasn't , it wasn't on the regional news it was peculiar !
Well we did It was on the six o'clock nat well it was on all day , one o'clock , two o'clock , three o'clock Yeah the four o'clock , six o'clock normal news .
nine o'clock yeah .
It wasn't on the regional news .
Where were they ?
Salford Keys .
He was up seeingNONMET all the north west candidates parliamentary candidates .
Jean was in that horrible sa mustard and black striped laugh contraption !
laugh Stuck out like a sore So that everybody noticed !
Yeah .
laugh Her dressing up outfit .
HearNONMET Labour are one point five I heardNONMET it yesterday Yeah .
All the sh I thoughtNONMET she was goingNONMET to be meetingNONMET him next weekend then ?
All the dirty tricks start now though .
At the regional conference at Blackpool .
Erm I don't , I don't , I don't whether he's goingNONMET to that .
ForgottenNONMET what it's calledMET .
Yeah , it's si I knowNONMET it's north Yeah .
west , er no , la regional councils re Labour council , the urban councils or something like that .
Something like that , yeah .
No , na well I don't knowNONMET , he might be .
I don't knowNONMET whether he's goingNONMET to that , he might be but this was , this , he was up sort of seeingNONMET , meetingNONMET all the Labour Party candidates for the north west .
Well if I had a million investedNONMET , have it all investedNONMET .
Yep !
Yep !
I agreeNONMET .
Seriously , I'd fucking have it out of there , everything I ownNONMET .
But he ta all the dirty tricks are startingNONMET now .
Kinnock's a funny he really is .
He's er the Sunday Times tomorrow Er , I rememberNONMET you saidNONMET about full Sunday Times tomorrow , Major exposeNONMET on the lader le the lea the Labour leaderships ties with a Moscow Moscow company .
Did you seeNONMET it ?
Yeah .
Oh you meanNONMET , they're still gettingMET Moscow's Yeah .
It's like , what's it they've gotMET ?
I thinkNONMET it's about time I got my share of the Well who's doing it , tomorrow , what they callMET it ?
Report he's doing tomorrow ?
Oh Er Sunday Times .
Personal view of the files on .
Typically .
yawn Dennis Healey , fuck !
He's gonMET na out with some stick !
Kinnock was sayingNONMET to erm the candidates , you knowNONMET , we re I realizeNONMET that a lot of you are gettingMET it rough at the moment , cos there's about five Labour Yeah .
candidates all been arrestedNONMET in the north Yeah .
west mysteriously .
But er Jean not a .
Yeah .
laugh Derek , there's somebody Derek Derby Derby , that's right .
Blackpool's under investigation .
Anyway , so erm he saidNONMET , but you knowNONMET he was sayingNONMET to them that er , it's not just at the bottom end , he saidNONMET , in our village in Wales we've gotMET the Sun have now positionedMET two reporters who have livedNONMET in the village the these the they sitNONMET in a car outside his house day and night laugh photographing who comesNONMET in .
They've been to his little boy's primary school , interviewed the teachers and headmistress and all the school friends and everything just tryingNONMET to getMET a dirty story .
Well that , but your main areas will be gonNONMET na be before .
So What ?
we're just sayingNONMET main area's You ought to saveMET them wooden type of things for it .
You knowNONMET the Yeah .
Yeah .
Should have boughtNONMET them for .
Ve er , yeah , I meanNONMET it's , it's Are they expensive though ?
expensive , it is very expensive .
Well you could have your dance floor , actual dance floor whatever , couldn't you ?
And then something Mm .
Well it's You can makeNONMET it different like and makeNONMET it sort of still a dance area .
Yeah .
Something like they have at Chapel .
Yeah , what have they gotNONMET down in there ?
Just the wooden floor .
It's just , just a little , a little sort of parquet Small flooring type of thing .
Oh !
That type of floor , yeah .
And carpet all round it and just a Oh it's carpet is it round Yeah .
it ?
But it's only a tiny area Yeah but isn't it ?
Yeah .
But as I sayNONMET , in the Sugar House so we I meanNONMET , we've ju we , all we did was , was we the mass the big central area we just literally sort of lino type floor and carpeted round the edges Round the edge .
and into the bar area .
And it's a ma I meanNONMET you getMET four hundred people on the dance floor in the Sugar House .
Erm Where is this Sugar House ?
It's in erm In Lancaster ?
behind Waring and Gillow .
How do you getNONMET to that ?
SayNONMET the rest of us didn't knowNONMET where it was .
Up , up the alleyway by the Yorkshire , you gotMET Yorkshire House there Ah !
Yes .
Waring and Gillow , and it's up that alleyway there .
Oh is it in there ?
It's , it was the architects ' department erm , till they goNONMET like you knowNONMET , till they Palatine Hall erm , it used to be the architects ' department .
We boughtNONMET it off the city , well Michelin boughtMET it off the city council and they gazumpedNONMET us and erm but we , we have tables and chairs onto the dance floor on other nights and just pullNONMET them back when it's clear Yes .
Saturday night there's gonNONMET na Yeah .
be a thousand people in .
That's how we used to do it .
Ah yeah .
So er can they getMET , yeah , they getMET eleven , twelve How many's ?
Er I thinkNONMET they le it's nine hundred The isn't it ?
Is the like , legal limit .
They've , they putNONMET like twelve , thirteen on a night .
they've putMET twelve , thirteen hundred in .
But , when , when they can but you've ju i in the Empire if you , if you've I don't knowNONMET actually , i before they before they messed about with all the raised seating and everything , if it had been just leftMET open like the Old Floral Hall , like it was you'd have gotMET seventeen I knowNONMET .
eighteen hundred in .
With a balcony .
Erm I meanNONMET as an ol as the Old Floral Hall they must have had Mm mm .
they must have been puttingMET two thousand in you knowNONMET Yeah .
in those days .
Yeah .
Yeah .
Well I meanNONMET , they'll all be packedMET up in the bars upstairs wouldn't they , and everything Yeah .
you knowNONMET , leaningNONMET over the balcony and all that sort of er Yeah .
Mm .
But I'd er , I'd you knowNONMET the way they've , the way they've gotMET it now I don't , I don't knowNONMET .
Well But , you knowNONMET i I meanNONMET actually the other , the other aspect of it Anne if you , if you pullNONMET this out you could be talkingNONMET about hostingNONMET small conferences and that Yeah .
couldn't you ?
Definitely .
Cos if you're lookingMET at a two hundred capacity conference for er Yeah .
Easy-peasy !
No messingMET !
Ma that , that just makesMET the total picture just different altogether .
So right so that's that little job You sorted out .
probably needNONMET to I'm getMET I'm gonNONMET na playMET with that and seeMET what probably needNONMET to getMET Ken's per we can do with it then .
probably needNONMET to getMET Ken's permission !
Who ?
Mr .
Ken's permission ?
What for ?
Structural alterations .
What for ?
For that ?
MindNONMET you , act actually I've gotNONMET ta be catched I won't actually do it I'll just comeNONMET in run a mo just give it complete customers and and help laugh they'll sayNONMET well you , it's awful , you're awfully sorry but it's .
On what ?
Actually th from the original structure , I meanNONMET , it's , it's , it was half that size anyway .
Mm .
Well as I sayNONMET , you can seeNONMET where it was , it's that sort of diamond Well why do you es I thinkNONMET .
did you have get his , well it int structural is it ?
No .
I wouldn't No , it int because structural's walls .
Oh that's getMET his permission for nothing !
Well he won't knowNONMET I don't I don't thinkNONMET he dare showNONMET At the moment .
his face at moment , he hadn't been anywhere round to , since all this happenedNONMET before Christmas .
Obnoxious little man int he ?
He's like a ferret !
Mm .
I getNONMET on very well with him though .
laugh laugh So what is so there's nothing to the other side , just apart from this big room ?
Yeah .
But , and a bar .
What , and that in there ?
Yeah .
So that's that one ?
There's a massive room with twelve snooker , twelve snooker tables Well , yeah , well , well in .
er just maybe the size of this .
Right .
It is the size Well , no of this .
It is exactly Well I meanNONMET eh ?
Yeah .
It is the size of this , yeah .
Yeah .
Right .
So we'll wantNONMET And what they've , what they've gotMET , they've gotMET the bar in a far bottom corner You used to goNONMET in to playNONMET snooker didn't you ?
I did .
laugh Disco nights .
When we have a when we were talkingNONMET to them and we had the door through and my snooker got really good .
Mm .
We did , we had a snooker table at home and my snooker will never getNONMET good .
laugh I used to end up hittingNONMET them like a golf ball !
laugh Used to goNONMET bloody berserk !
Good with iron and everything you knowNONMET .
Oh .
Them were the days .
Mm .
I hatedNONMET it !
What ?
When you were at ?
Do you fancyNONMET a quick game then ?
laugh No .
.
Yeah .
Might do in a minute .
Well I shall goNONMET because if that fella's been from , if that fella saidNONMET I didn't have a job I'll be jumpingNONMET up and down like a what d' ya callNONMET it !
Oh alright .
Okay .
I'm , I'm goingNONMET to erm we'll makeNONMET that into something American .
But I don't knowNONMET what .
Have to thinkNONMET of that .
We do we will , I'm just sayingNONMET we do wanNONMET na getMET into cocktail and Ranch House .
laugh Oh .
Eh ?
SaidNONMET a Ranch House from .
Sod off !
laugh laugh laugh No we don't wanNONMET na be lookingMET at You seeNONMET some fucking morons we getNONMET in !
No , we wanNONMET na be That's who we needNONMET to adviseNONMET us don't we ?
We needNONMET Geoffrey along to adviseNONMET us .
laugh Yeah .
laugh Geoffrey , how would you Mm .
how do you AmericanizeNONMET this ?
Bastards stealingMET our customers last night !
Yeah .
Yeah .
CriticizingNONMET a scooterist Where's my customers ?
CriticizingNONMET a scooterist don't wantNONMET them in town and then putMET functions on and cheap beer for them when they comeNONMET .
Well they do that don't they ?
I meanNONMET , they're all you knowNONMET .
Supposed to be four hundred in the Ranch House last night .
On the ground like .
We needNONMET lo we needsNONMET lots of piles of steaming horse manure and things don't we around and laugh stuff like that ?
laugh GotNONMET ta getNONMET it right .
No !
That's for Frontier Land .
We are laugh we are erm Thought it was hardly .
We're Boston .
Yeah definite .
That's right .
We're near Boston .
Yeah .
Cheers .
Yeah .
Yeah !
No .
laugh Why ?
Does it Punters wouldn't goMET , goMET for it .
No .
No I don't , no , no , no , no , no , but I knowNONMET it wantsMET to be erm Eh !
Have you seenNONMET the new rules on er bar staff ?
No .
They're not allowedNONMET to smokeNONMET .
Oh yeah .
No , you're not .
No , no , no .
No .
Full stop ?
Anywhere .
Yeah .
Not , you can't even wanderNONMET outside So I goNONMET doo doo doo doo doo .
That's right .
And , you've gotNONMET ta wearNONMET gloves to useNONMET the till .
You what ?
You can't ha you can't handleNONMET money and And serveNONMET pullNONMET pints .
Who saysNONMET that ?
This is Health and Environment , it's a new When's it in operation .
Er er , I don't knowNONMET actually .
I've gotNONMET it in Disco Club Mirror , it's the front page out the Oh I couldn't have that !
Grantham .
They're treatingMET ba GotNONMET to have a look at this .
they're treatingMET alcohol as food .
Yeah .
So all the hygiene things on food applyMET to alcohol .
Oh I knowNONMET that .
So you can't handleNONMET , you can't handleNONMET You're gonNONMET na have to have somebody else to takeNONMET the money won't you ?
Fucking cashier .
You'll have to have a cashier .
.
laugh You can't do it though .
You can't have , yo it'd meanMET one to serveNONMET and one takeNONMET the money .
It's fucking ridiculous !
SayNONMET if you're , if you're really busy at the bar just taking your gloves off and fucking putting them on .
Oh aye you're gonNONMET na do it aren't you !
Well what we'll do is we'll do , we'll just have a pump at the side of the till .
Well you There's punters on the door !
Yeah , you knowNONMET like Fucking !
you knowNONMET like it is .
Oh no it isn't !
You wanNONMET na go !
laugh laugh Alright then .
Or nuclear license opens laugh No , just askNONMET them if it's effective with your license just , you knowNONMET , sort of as you comeNONMET MindNONMET you , one from the sale .
Vo Volks Volks took them We're sterilizingNONMET the bar with those .
Volks took them into , not Volks , er what they calledNONMET ?
Somebody tookNONMET me to seeNONMET one of their pubs in Liverpool it was wonderful !
Where the shutters are Yeah .
all , just hardboard like that , with just a little O like that and you , you , you shoutNONMET a pint of beer and you pushedNONMET your money through and then a beer ca cameMET out the other side !
BetMET it was erm It was rough !
Yeah !
Waste of time though in n it ?
laugh It was a bit of a rough area .
What type of beer are you gettingNONMET !
laugh laugh No , and a pint of sherry !
laugh Yeah , and plastic glasses as well .
Yeah !
laugh Oh my Great !
I meanNONMET , the only way you could do that would be if you had a till at one end and people boughtNONMET whatever they wantedNONMET and were givenNONMET a voucher and you walkedNONMET down the other end and exchangedNONMET Mm .
it for drink .
That's the only way you could actually makeMET that work at all .
Yeah , but just thinkNONMET of how much messing about there is .
Ah !
It'd be unbelievable !
I meanNONMET it'd be two thi forty we'd be round the bloody bend !
Yeah , but it's somebody sittingNONMET in an office in n it decidingNONMET this !
Yeah , but who , who do you you knowNONMET why SittingNONMET in a suit in a nice office saying , wo !
This is a good idea .
You knowNONMET they don't serveNONMET behind the bar on a Saturday night .
They wantNONMET somebody here from the for half an hour and them not being servedNONMET first Here !
You knowNONMET what happensNONMET , d' ya knowNONMET what happensNONMET then they'll getNONMET people like .
Yeah .
People will getNONMET so antiseptic that they'll not be able to standNONMET any sort of germs of any sort .
laugh That's Yeah .
true that !
I meanNONMET , you thinkNONMET about all this I meanNONMET a load of crap when they have larders and all that !
Alright , you might have got the odd but it's all this warming , doing it and then half leavingNONMET it and then Yeah .
warming it up again that does the damage .
Certainly does .
Mm .
So well I shall wanderNONMET back with my little book now .
I'm er I'm er , I'm just er What ?
Right .
I shall comeNONMET tomorrow tonight when it's dark .
laugh Right .
I'm o ooh !
Actually tomorrow night's not a good id well No , nonsense Oh is it rave night tomorrow Yeah .
night ?
Yeah .
Ah !
Rob's coming to lookNONMET at lights .
Yeah , I meanNONMET it's all light and smoke and all the tables and chairs are out and Can't seeNONMET a thing .
And you won't be able to seeNONMET anything .
I knowNONMET I comeNONMET on a Friday I were absolutely gobsmackedNONMET !
Yeah .
You can only seeNONMET twelve feet er , you'd thinkNONMET the place was empty in the bar .
Erm I meanNONMET Saturday night would be be better Anne .
Oh Saturday night then .
Yeah , well I'll have a wander in Saturday night then .
But is that is that Yeah .
Oh .
This is definite .
laugh Bye !
Bye .
You knowNONMET that I'm not gonNONMET na getNONMET out of course .
GotNONMET ta climbNONMET up that other end .
There's another there's a orifice down there .
Right .
Why are the doors always wrote wrong way !
I knowNONMET .
I knowNONMET .
That's er , that's our That's ours just there , yeah .
Yeah .
That's ours as well there .
Oh sorry .
That's ours as well down there .
You getNONMET enough for twenty five K hav haven't they ?
laugh And that's with the chip system obviously .
Yeah .
It's er cleaner's room , two dressing rooms and toilets down there .
Well this is the area that you'll have to do something about is the if you're gonNONMET na knockNONMET it into the Winter Gardens this is the area that knocks into the Winter Gardens .
Oh !
Does that leadMET Well , along  that corridor is Well I , we won't be doing anything nearly spectacular area than this .
It won't openNONMET .
Mm .
Where are all the light switches ?
I meanNONMET , what , what we initially , this was a cloakroom this , this area Yeah .
wasn't here , i this Mm .
was the door and there was a little cloakroom Yeah .
but er , our customers don't take their jackets off anyway Oh right .
Don't they ?
Erm So you don't needNONMET a cloakroom then ?
No .
But more in , but what it was we when I was in here , sort of five days a week , nine to five job Mhm mm .
it was gettingNONMET depres it was gettingNONMET oppressive in that little office down there .
Oh !
I would have thoughtNONMET , yeah .
Awful !
You'd get a So we were gonNONMET na moveNONMET an office up to here with some natural light in it .
Yeah .
Cos there's nothing worse than there being a room with no natural light in , really .
I didn't realizeNONMET it at the time but I thinkNONMET it wantsMET Eh !
No they thinkNONMET it's really bad .
Yeah .
Yeah .
So It's really bad not enough light .
It's oppressive .
Right .
Course , the other thing you've gotNONMET ta investNONMET in is tables and well you don't needNONMET chairs , but tables , I meanNONMET as you can seeMET we've gotNONMET two hundred of those poly-cotton chairs in there which is erm can be used .
I'll getMET some tables up with erm Mm .
Tables are quite expensive though .
So many places Barry are goingMET down Well , true I tellNONMET you .
Yeah .
Just keepNONMET , just , in fact just keepNONMET well le let's getNONMET it sortedMET out and then we'll just get er er cos plenty of storage space and stuff .
Mm .
Used to have tables and extensions you seeMET Mm .
Bob makesNONMET tables .
Bloody hell !
I've gotNONMET extensions , sure .
I tellNONMET you what make i trestle tables are so expensive aren't they ?
I knowNONMET !
Incredible price !
You still .
You can't , you can't getNONMET either , you knowNONMET , proper No .
you knowNONMET , big wooden I knowNONMET .
trestle tables you just can't getNONMET anywhere .
No .
There's another wasted area .
There's incredible wasted areas in this place !
It's very badly plannedNONMET you knowNONMET Terrible in n it ?
inside here .
It's all corridor and er Mm .
It's all foyers and things .
WantsMET to be like Chamber of Horrors !
laugh As you comeNONMET down , you knowNONMET .
laugh laugh Right !
Alright .
I'm off !
SpeakNONMET to you later .
Right .
Cheers .
Bye !
Bye bye .
The two companies concerned are tryingMET to recordNONMET the spoken word .
We don't wantNONMET you on tape .
So the thing , the thing to do is to sort of dot around in the conversation things like pre antidisestablishmentarianism .
And hopefully laugh This will getMET modern usage of words .
Of , one of the words that she was talkingNONMET about , people have startedNONMET usingNONMET wicked for a normal phrase .
I meanNONMET , it doesn't meanMET what it saysMET in the dictionary any more .
That's a really wicked thing to sayNONMET , he wentNONMET , no it's not it's bad , it's not wicked .
He thinksNONMET of wicked as being good , he doesn't , cause Mandy saysNONMET wicked .
Yeah .
Well that's the idea anyway .
He goes round sayingNONMET wicked , it's his favourite word .
Are you goingNONMET to goMET to sleep , eh ?
Please baby gurgling That doesn't meanMET much , does it ?
She's just lookingNONMET over there to seeNONMET which one she wantsNONMET to throw up on .
Who do you wantNONMET to goNONMET and gurgleNONMET at ?
Eh ?
Oh not Uncle Brian , no no no .
No ?
Have you had enough grub for a little while ?
There you are , goNONMET and seeNONMET somebody .
she's gotNONMET a ginormous one .
She had it .
Well don't to me I've only just you ComeMET on , giveMET Auntie Pauline a nice smile .
GoMET on , you do lovely smiles .
baby talk If she smilesNONMET it will be at your hairline .
Pardon ?
She won't be able to seeNONMET that far , will she ?
She might be able to seeNONMET a blurred shape .
she's just lookedNONMET this way now .
She keptNONMET lookingNONMET over there .
Don't knowNONMET what she was lookingNONMET at .
What were you lookingNONMET at ?
Well she definitely looksNONMET at her mobile .
Yeah ?
I knowNONMET it drivesMET you mad , the music but er I wouldn't mindNONMET if those blasted slightly longer life in terms of the music they playedNONMET .
But unfortunately , you knowNONMET , it's singing or whatever .
But it's over again .
Well , yes .
Well I meanNONMET that's what's nice for them , isn't it ?
Yeah .
You seeMET they've gotMET a short concentration .
Do you thinkNONMET music in the background sort of , do all the lyrics as well .
laugh Oh of course Oh well done .
the last half hour .
a little bit wasn't it ?
She's had a lot of that today .
Have you ?
Well don't putMET it on too loud , will you ?
why babies have a suck there .
laugh You sayNONMET they're having milk , he wentMET , what do you meanNONMET ?
Milk ?
What do you meanNONMET milk comesMET out there ?
laugh So I saidNONMET well it's only when you've just had a baby like , you knowNONMET , like cows .
LoveNONMET him .
O K. You will speakNONMET to me .
Eh ?
You will speakNONMET to , I'm very relaxed .
I wouldn't likeNONMET to goMET for a week in silence .
You knowNONMET , I can't stayMET for a week in silence .
I didn't thinkNONMET you could .
laugh Oh !
Where'd you comeNONMET from ?
Oh dear , I thoughtNONMET you were a , there , oh there .
baby speaking What's like ?
He doesn't knowNONMET his middle name , does he ?
her name .
playing with baby noise It's nearly ready .
music .
Five minutes , oh we're late aren't we ?
Never mindNONMET .
I spokeNONMET to today .
Oh , right .
How is he ?
Well , that's the name of the company isn't it ?
He's busy .
Oh , that's what he wantsNONMET to be isn't it ?
Bad news .
It's bad news being busy ?
Why ?
He , who ?
His wife's laid up in bed Why , what's wrong ?
with back pain .
She's not allowedNONMET to moveNONMET Oh dear .
at all .
Well she worksNONMET with him , doesn't she ?
accounts department .
He's gotNONMET to goNONMET and dealMET with the children , takeNONMET them to and from work , then runMET a business .
Then he's gotNONMET to goNONMET home at lunchtime and giveNONMET her some food .
Aha .
Now that kind of busy is not the right sort of busy is it ?
Not pleasant .
Are you hungry Charlotte ?
Are you ?
No .
No ?
You don't wantNONMET anything to eatNONMET ?
Oh right .
I'll eatNONMET your dinner .
We'll eatNONMET your dinner for you .
I'll goNONMET and eatNONMET your dinner .
She's goingNONMET to goNONMET and eatNONMET your dinner .
You have .
What have you been doing ?
Have you been buyingNONMET naughty things again Joelle ?
Naughty girl .
eatenNONMET my dinner ?
I haven't eatenNONMET your dinner , it's not ready yet .
laugh .
Nearly ready .
video Oh , you're doing it in English are you ?
I hateNONMET this in English .
This , this video .
Oh laugh it's the voices I can't standMET .
video Bonk .
Did it goMET bonk ?
laugh ListenNONMET , goNONMET away She doesn't sayNONMET go away very much now .
GoNONMET away .
Does she ?
Well she's just heardNONMET it , that's why , but she doesn't she doesn't sayNONMET it very much does she ?
No ?
I've only heardNONMET it once or twice in the last few When I changeNONMET her nappy ?
Well , that's normal .
She doesn't wantNONMET you to changeNONMET her nappy does she ?
laugh Water please .
Right , let's goNONMET and seeNONMET if these chicken things are ready .
Right , right , would you likeNONMET to sort of startNONMET gettingNONMET yourselves into the other room .
Now the baby's waking up , dinner's ready .
Is baby waking up ?
She keepsNONMET kickingNONMET her legs and going , ah , ah .
Is the ready ?
No , it's not .
I saidNONMET tryNONMET and startNONMET thinkingNONMET about gettingNONMET in there because How soon ?
About two minutes .
Shall we startNONMET ?
After dinner , yeah .
Yeah .
Brian and Pauline probably won't arriveNONMET till it's virtually over .
Probably not .
Do you thinkNONMET Charlotte will eatNONMET a turkey steak with garlic and herbs ?
What ?
I saidNONMET do you thinkNONMET Charlotte will eatNONMET a turkey steak with garlic and herbs ?
We'll seeNONMET , won't we .
You hungry ?
Miss ?
What's happeningNONMET , water please , water , water .
Ah , that's that done .
Oh , it smellsNONMET good .
They do don't they ?
I thoughtNONMET we'd tryNONMET them for a change .
They lookNONMET really nice .
Like chicken Kiev without a load of sloppy butter .
Bit smaller than normal ones .
plates There's a lot of banging and crashing on this tape .
What else do I needNONMET ?
A plate for Charlotte .
Brian saidNONMET , we'll makeMET it tomorrow night , eight to eight thirty .
So , cos he had an early , erm , what do you callNONMET it , early estimate .
Oh Charlotte , lookNONMET what .
Don't be naughty .
Can you sortMET erm , madame out ?
Off you go Jess , go and be fedNONMET .
Is that nice ?
Is that a nice cake ?
Mm .
Mm .
Pardon ?
Oh you're colouringNONMET Postman Pat .
You've gotNONMET a black crayon again .
It's Charlotte choosing .
Pardon ?
It's Charlotte choosing .
ChoseNONMET what ?
The cake !
Oh , right .
Did you knowNONMET what you were choosingNONMET ?
Did you walkNONMET around Tesco's ?
Did you walkNONMET , or did you sitNONMET in your pushchair ?
TellNONMET the truth .
Did you walkNONMET , or did you walkNONMET in your pushchair ?
SitNONMET in the pushchair .
You wentNONMET in a car didn't you ?
Have you toldNONMET Daddy what you did ?
Erm ?
GoMET on , you tellNONMET Daddy what you did in front of laugh erm We wentNONMET , we wentNONMET to Tesco Mhm and after Tesco , just next to the door there's some little car Oh yeah .
for you to goNONMET makes noise of car Yeah , one of these things you sitNONMET in , putNONMET twenty P in or whatever it is , and have a ride for two minutes .
So she saidNONMET , mm .
So I saidNONMET , you can goNONMET in there when we are , when we done the shopping .
So I saidNONMET , if you are a good girl you can chooseNONMET a cake .
So wentNONMET to Tesco , and we walkNONMET around , the cake , erm , cake thing Aisle ?
and er , I saidNONMET Oh Charlotte , don't talkNONMET with your mouth full .
We wentNONMET to Tesco to buyNONMET some milk .
To buyNONMET some milk ?
Because Sainsbury didn't have any yesterday .
Did they have any today ?
I don't knowNONMET , I didn't goNONMET today laugh .
What did I do today ?
I madeNONMET beans , when I'd finishedNONMET sortingMET out this one I .
Charlotte don't playNONMET with that lovey .
That's a good girl .
Then I wentNONMET to the bank .
Then I wentNONMET to Tesco .
That takeMET me nearly all the er All morning .
And erm Then this afternoon we wentNONMET to Croydon .
Exciting .
I wentNONMET to Tesco .
You wentNONMET to Tesco ?
We are very tired .
We are .
Absolutely .
Who's we ?
Me .
We .
All of us ?
You're not tired .
Why not ?
You shouldn't be tired .
I'm happy .
Oh I'm so glad you're happy .
She's a poor old lady at the moment .
Is she ?
Poor old lady .
Charlotte please don't talkNONMET with your mouth full , there's a good girl .
KeepNONMET your mouth closed when you've gotNONMET something in it or we'll takeNONMET something away .
It's not , it's not very nice darling , to do that .
It's not good manners .
We wantNONMET to bring up a nice girl , not a little pig .
Alright ?
pig .
No , nice girl , not a little pig .
pig .
Yes , nice girl .
Are you a nice girl ?
What ?
Not the way you stuffNONMET your cake in your mouth like that .
Dear oh dear .
I wouldn't bounceNONMET at the same time Don't bounceNONMET when you're eatingNONMET please .
And shutNONMET your mouth .
Good girl .
trampoline now .
You're goingNONMET on the trampoline .
Well finishNONMET your mouthful first , please .
Or Ah that wasn't her fault .
Have you finished ?
Have you finishedNONMET eating ?
No .
No ?
No calls for you .
Swansea .
Right hand side .
Oh right .
I couldn't work out what you were talkingNONMET about .
It only takesMET one at a time .
No it's not now .
It's bath time really .
Be bath time in about fifteen minutes .
I thoughtNONMET you'd finishedNONMET your cake , haven't you finished ?
CatchNONMET it , one two three catchNONMET it , one two three .
I saidNONMET catch it , you didn't catchNONMET it , .
loud music What ?
loud music It's Top Of The Pops .
Top Of The Pops , oh I haven't watchedNONMET Top of the Pops .
will sitNONMET there cringingMET , saidNONMET I can't believeNONMET they putMET this rubbish on terrible .
Who was on it ?
Don't knowNONMET who was on it actually .
Well she doesn't likeNONMET M C Hammer , he was on , and then there was one week with Germans on it and it was , erm , it's a German group that used to be popular and haven't done a song for ages .
It wasn't the Robots was it ?
Yeah , the Robots .
I meanNONMET , it was just the words they were usingNONMET , I meanNONMET oh It makesMET you cringeMET , oh and then that er girl oh she's done quite a few things recently .
She singsNONMET much better than she talksNONMET .
back to my diet today .
ThankNONMET you very much , yes I will actually .
No , it's not my day to dietNONMET , been , been naughty today .
baby crying Oh dear .
PopNONMET him on the shoulder .
.
So did you enjoyNONMET Paul Simon ?
Yeah .
She was about to but she foundNONMET a sticker on book She comesMET out well on tape doesn't she ?
Who Charlotte ?
Mm .
I didn't realiseNONMET how clear her speech was until I heardNONMET it on the tape .
It's really quite good actually .
Not bad .
Oh we'll do this one again .
drop off laugh Cos it's lights and things isn't it ?
She was lookingNONMET at er lights in Sainsbury's the other day .
laugh It lookedNONMET like that , didn't it ?
Carol was swayingNONMET at her .
You missedNONMET that .
I just swayedNONMET at her , and she laugh music It's Conway Twitty isn't it ?
Is it ?
Oh no .
How far back does this goMET , I supposeNONMET early fifties ?
Er nineteen fifty six .
I rememberNONMET Conway Twitty .
Oh yes .
You were in your cradle .
Elvis , didn't he ?
I don't thinkNONMET he ever recorded it , I thinkNONMET he just used to singNONMET it at his , er sort of cabaret .
Well so many of these songs have been done by so many people that you would be forgivenNONMET for thinkingNONMET that , that .
Because there's one there , one on one of these that er either Paul Simon or Art Garfunkel or someone , can't rememberNONMET which one , probably Art Garfunkel as Paul Simon does all his own doesn't he ?
Well he has done other people's .
Well there's one on there , I can't rememberNONMET Like for instance the , er , what do they callNONMET those two ?
Oh the two brothers .
In the Everley Brothers ?
The Everley Brothers , that's it .
You knowNONMET , Wake up Little Suzie ?
Oh yeah .
Well Simon and Garfunkel did that Wicked far out .
it's a groovy record this .
Shut     up .
laugh Can't rememberNONMET which one it is but I'll recogniseNONMET it when I hearNONMET it .
He's doing very well , isn't he .
He is .
Have to employNONMET him full time .
He's always quite good .
I just can't believeNONMET how daft he is .
I supposeNONMET you likeNONMET that film .
Yes .
ForgetNONMET it .
You're not having cake .
Does she likeNONMET cake ?
Well she's lookingNONMET at it .
So how's things down at the ?
Not too bad .
Quite good actually .
Yeah ?
KeepingNONMET him busy out on estimates and Yeah he's out all this week .
Well , my dad won't passMET them onto Terry .
Me dad saidNONMET he's had enough Well , we were debatingNONMET whether to giveMET it to you or not .
But I thoughtNONMET , well if Terry noticesNONMET he might .
Well in fact two really big estimates Who , Terry ?
Yeah .
And one wantedMET re-estimatingNONMET , the other one wantedMET a few more prices cos everything like marble tops which are goingNONMET to costNONMET a fortune to getNONMET done .
We giveMET them a provisional kind of price and not really goneMET into it in detail .
So she had a list of about five things she wantedNONMET sortedMET out and she saidNONMET so far we were the cheapest .
But she's gotMET about six different firms on the computer and was comparingNONMET notes .
So I worked out and the other two were really fitting and electrics and it was all down to Terry to sortMET those out .
And they're both , about two to three thousand pounds worth of sanitary ware or more but two to three thousand pounds worth of work .
Well you can't affordNONMET to loseMET them , can you ?
No .
So what's goingNONMET to happenNONMET then ?
God knowsNONMET .
He saidNONMET , I askedNONMET , askedNONMET , well I leftNONMET a message on Saturday for him to sortMET them out didn't I ?
He already knewNONMET about that .
And then I askedNONMET my father on Tuesday to remindNONMET him and he saidNONMET , he'd already saidNONMET he'd fetchMET them in on Tuesday .
And he , my father remindedNONMET him last night and he saidNONMET yeah he would have them by tomorrow morning .
But he's , he just really has to getNONMET in touch with one of them and tellNONMET them the prices .
So I don't knowNONMET .
Well , I meanNONMET he'd done , he's done this first estimate , these are all just polishing touches cos people are obviously interested in , you knowNONMET they're well keen on our prices .
they can't pursueMET it till we come back to them .
They're not pursuingMET it until we putMET these things out .
My father just turned round I've had enough of it if Terry's not goingNONMET to do the estimate he passesMET them on to Brian .
I saidNONMET yeah then I getMET into trouble with them for not passing estimates to Terry and then there's an argument .
If he , if he saysNONMET anything to me I'll just have to tellNONMET him .
But he's not doing the estimates he's been givenMET and he can't affordNONMET to throwMET money away .
It's cos he's workingNONMET for him at the moment money .
He always getsNONMET like that and then he forgetsNONMET after like a month or two when he hasn't workedNONMET for him .
He forgetsNONMET how annoying he can be and you knowNONMET he swingsMET the other way .
I meanNONMET Brian's pulled in a lot of work .
lot of people kind of sayingNONMET come back again on Thursday So he's , he's .
If we gotMET Terry to do that we'd be well away .
They , they would loveNONMET him I meanNONMET one of them it was annoying really cos Terry's just not pullingMET his weight .
I don't understandNONMET it , if I liveNONMET to be a hundred I won't understandNONMET it .
And also , it's cos that , you knowNONMET after we had that row about Terry , after Bank Holiday expectingNONMET not to have to do a day in the shop , and er he's already owing Brian a day ?
Guess who's doing the extra day ?
gotMET my dad to coverMET a day .
And then he takesMET a day off Bank Holidays .
and he can't do it because my dad .
But then tomorrow he's actually doing his own work .
So he could easily have .
And on Monday So who's coveringMET tomorrow ?
Well my brother's coveredMET practically all week and Brian's doing tomorrow .
Terry phoned up askingNONMET what , Tuesday morning about quarter past eight saidNONMET who was coveringMET .
And he saidNONMET well my father is doing today I can't do today I'll do it Friday and I shoutedNONMET down the stairs but he owesNONMET you a day you shouldn't be goingNONMET in .
I meanNONMET he hasn't been in the shop once this week .
Somebody's gotNONMET to tellNONMET him to So do Dave and Terry in the shop .
They have the records .
And it hasn't been sortedMET yet ?
Oh no .
He's gotMET the gall to phone up on Tuesday and sayNONMET Eileen can't do a day , we're goingNONMET to be short of Eileen .
So the answer is to just phoneNONMET them .
I can't do it .
I'm not doing it .
What's the point of carrying on like that ?
Well he's goingNONMET to carry on like that isn't he ?
Not unless someone putsMET their foot down .
And if your father is currently takingMET your side of things baby shouting worth sounding him out as to how far he'll takeMET Ah whilst he's in the mood ?
Yeah .
He's not being that much You sure ?
Mmm .
He's probably only in the mood cos he's probably upsettingMET them on his night out cos they go out in the evenings .
On a Wednesday evening , don't they .
Cos Terry I meanNONMET , wouldn't he rather have Terry as a sort of permanent worker anyway ?
It's not being fair do any workNONMET .
Oh what , your dad ?
Pauline's dad er too expensive I thinkNONMET .
Terry usesNONMET the shop to getNONMET extra money every so often , usesNONMET my dad ticking over running when he Why .
He does getMET the offer , I meanNONMET baby shouting two months and she phoned up and I kind of made out it gotNONMET lost in the post .
I erm got , checkNONMET you've gotMET two days , you've gotNONMET giveMET me the estimate , it's gotNONMET to be on because she's expectingNONMET it to be done straight away on the computer and sent .
And he actually gotNONMET that one done .
Do you knowNONMET it was only five lines .
I meanNONMET I could have madeMET it up it was that easy .
So I sent that off .
She was in first thing , I meanNONMET I sent it off that evening she was in first thing the next morning yes that's fine .
So he's gotMET that job and another one .
She's tryingNONMET isn't she ?
laugh I don't understandNONMET why it surprisesNONMET you , that's what getsMET me .
I meanNONMET It's normal behaviour .
laugh Charlotte's done it too .
Can you passNONMET me that er , sheet ?
This ?
Is that your reading ?
That's not your regulations you have to readNONMET is it ?
Oh no , that's a I was goingNONMET to sayNONMET that doesn't seemNONMET very thick No , that's to do with this tape .
Oh I tellNONMET you what is quite funny these , the act .
Mmm .
Oh .
hereby enacted her gracious majesty , you knowNONMET , etcetera etcetera .
What was it , the Lords temporal and spiritual , that's what they callNONMET themselves .
Now that is , that's Yes .
Yeah I realiseNONMET and I hopeNONMET I don't comeMET into contact with too many acts of parliament .
Oh , we had someone round to seeNONMET the house yesterday .
Oh yeah ?
They cameNONMET twenty minutes early , there's Brian up in the shower , there's me stuffing things in the cupboard under the stairs .
laugh That's an old trick .
I saidNONMET to Danny , don't openNONMET the door .
Don't openNONMET the door !
So as I'm still tryingNONMET to stuffNONMET things away , she openedNONMET the door and everything fellNONMET out .
lookNONMET round the front room , then they lookedNONMET round the , the garden .
While they were lookingNONMET round the garden I you've gotNONMET to getNONMET out the shower quick .
I don't knowNONMET .
They'd comeMET down from , they'd comeMET down from , erm , somewhere or other .
They're just doing a kind of tour of loads and loads of houses cos they keepNONMET movingNONMET with his job .
Oh , right .
She quite , I thinkNONMET she likedNONMET the area , she was sayingNONMET about the schools and that .
MindNONMET you , she likesNONMET erm and they're all separateNONMET , all the best ones round here are .
She saidNONMET don't they have any details ?
So I saidNONMET well , no it's not now is it , it's erm , oh it's that school that the .
Something and School of Arts now it's calledNONMET well technical School of Arts round here ?
No it's another , well technical , performing arts here .
performing arts and that's the technical It's a monstrosity .
Oh you rotten old pig , you've been sick .
Oh she hasn't ?
Oh .
Yeah , it's alright .
is it washable ?
Yeah , I thinkNONMET so .
You'll soon find out .
Yes .
Do you feelMET better now ?
Obviously .
I thinkNONMET she thinksNONMET she's gotNONMET some milk now .
Enough enough , do you wantNONMET to goNONMET buyNONMET some Polo ?
Mm .
Alright stopMET it then keep that Come on .
Just a minute  love .
Put it on alright ?
Yeah .
Off we goNONMET .
Right off   we go   then .
SeeNONMET you later Yep , where are my keys ?
Where did you putNONMET them , in the dining room ?
Found one what ?
Polo .
Polos just one Polo .
No just one packet .
laugh I thinkNONMET we might be able to manageMET that .
Aha .
Off  we go Just a minute darling it's alright I can affordNONMET to buyNONMET you a packet of Polos .
Off          we go     again I goNONMET home .
Pet hold mummy's hand hold mummy's hand , there's a good girl off     we go   .
I giveNONMET you money .
Bye .
Bye watch out .
ShutNONMET the door there we are .
Bit chilly , I runNONMET round .
laugh A bit chilly is it ?
Is it a bit chilly ?
Never mindNONMET .
Yes  that is a bit chilly .
What's a bit chilly ?
That's a bit chilly , he's a man .
It's a man , is he a bit chilly , he doesn't lookNONMET chilly he's got a coat on .
Pardon ?
LookNONMET at me when you're talkingNONMET to me I can't hearNONMET you .
a man .
laugh It's a man there's lots of men .
Can I goNONMET on there ?
Can you goNONMET on where ?
Oh oh thankNONMET you .
laugh Oh you wantNONMET to walkNONMET  on  that , oh Charlotte laugh comeMET on then , you're pushingNONMET me into the road .
GoNONMET in the road .
I don't wantNONMET to goNONMET in the road .
No .
No .
You do .
I don't .
I goNONMET on there seeNONMET .
Mm .
GonNONMET na fallNONMET .
Oh dear , I'm sorry .
sniff Who's comingNONMET to seeNONMET you today ?
Can you rememberNONMET ?
Grandma .
Pardon ?
A train .
Who's comingNONMET to seeNONMET you ?
Grandma's comingNONMET to seeNONMET me .
Grandma's comingNONMET to seeNONMET you , that's right and who else ?
Pardon ?
Grandma and Granddad .
Granddad that's right .
Granddad .
Or it's Grandpa Granddad's in American isn't he ?
Granddad's a long way away , he's on holiday .
Yeah , on holiday .
On holiday that's right , he sentNONMET you a letter didn't he ?
He sentNONMET you a letter .
HoldNONMET me a little bit .
What love ?
HoldNONMET my hand nicely sweetheart , there's a good girl we're comingNONMET up to a busy road in a minute and it's dangerous Walk nicely darling , there's a good girl walk nicely just standNONMET still a minute sweetheart hold my hand Charlotte please holdNONMET my hand there's a good girl .
Little bit further .
Little bit further yes , it's not very far it's not very far It's not very far .
to the shop is it ?
not very far .
Not very far no .
Oh that's a hole , a hole .
A hole in the road yes there's lots of holes in this road .
Can I goNONMET on there ?
Can you , oh alright then .
lot's of people dig up the pavement don't they ?
Can I goNONMET on there ?
Can you , yeah goNONMET on no you holdNONMET my hand please no running away , no running away there's too many cars alright .
No I'm not I'm not .
Not what ?
We're not goingNONMET in the car are we ?
No we're not goingNONMET in the car we're walkingNONMET aren't we ?
Oh Charlotte loo will you pick up your feet .
Pardon ?
Oh nearly there .
Pardon ?
Right we goNONMET across the road now nicely .
CrossNONMET the road .
CrossNONMET the road now you standNONMET there stand still , giveNONMET me your other hand good girl right now is it all clear Now you can crossNONMET .
O K off   we goNONMET off     we go     .
Off        we go      .
Off    we go   up the step there's a good girl .
Ooh ooh ooh .
Charlotte please , can you walkNONMET nicely ?
Pardon ?
It's here .
We're nearly there yes .
In here .
No we're not goingNONMET here we'll goNONMET a bit further .
No you must holdNONMET my hand darling , it's too dangerous too many cars alright too many cars .
What ?
I can't hearNONMET you sweetheart , speak up .
Charlotte what did you sayNONMET ?
What did you sayNONMET ?
I can't hearNONMET you I'm sorry wait till we getNONMET in the shop too noisy all  these cars isn't it there we are nearly there now nearly there .
Now where are those little , biscuits we had before ?
Hello , I didn't seeNONMET you .
Oh hello , how are you ?
How you gettingMET on ?
That another one ?
Oh yes .
Oh .
How are you anyway ?
Alright .
Yeah .
How you keepingMET ?
Oh , alright .
Yes .
Exhausted .
Alright there .
Oh yeah hard work with two .
Yeah , but , Charlotte , she's lookingNONMET away , hey .
Are you goingNONMET to sayNONMET hello ?
Don't be rude comeMET on , sayNONMET hello , do you rememberNONMET Lynn ?
Haven't seenNONMET you for a long time have you ?
No , not happy with me today .
laugh She's lovely .
Ha , how's Natalie ?
Oh she's alright , she goesNONMET to school .
Does she , doing exams yet ?
Yes , .
Is that ?
She's done startedNONMET it already .
She's startedNONMET ?
Yes .
How's she doing ?
Alright .
Oh .
Yeah , still Natalie to learnNONMET , the way , how I lookNONMET at it .
Pardon ?
She's not ready yet to learnNONMET .
No .
I thinkNONMET somebody's tired .
I wouldn't keepMET you , I giveMET you a visit one day .
Yes , do comeNONMET pop in .
We're usually there .
I'll giveMET you a ring .
Yeah .
We don't get out much at the moment .
Nice baby again .
Oh yes , and the big one .
Yeah .
Twelve pounds now .
Twelve pounds .
Yeah , she's only comingMET up for six weeks , mm , a monster .
little boy , a boy ?
No it's a girl .
Girl again .
Mm another girl , I knowNONMET .
another go No , two girls that's nice , we gotNONMET two girls , they've gotNONMET two boys , Brian and , so that's alright , laugh , we're quite happy .
Someone to pass the eh clothes down to , in n it ?
Yeah .
Oh dear .
Charlotte I've gotNONMET to finishNONMET , getNONMET home and feed this monster , don't do that please .
SeeNONMET you then .
O K , seeNONMET you soon , yeah , bye .
Charlotte .
Don't cryNONMET .
Be good another day .
Do you likeNONMET these ?
Do you likeNONMET these ?
, we'll getNONMET some of those , I'll putNONMET them in , in the trolley , comeMET on , now Charlotte please don't startNONMET being naughty , don't startNONMET .
Charlotte mummy getNONMET cross with you if you startNONMET this nonsense , just gotNONMET to getNONMET some dog food and some bread then we can goNONMET home , O K ?
No .
Don't you sayNONMET no to me .
You don't wantNONMET me to getNONMET cross do you ?
I don't wantNONMET to getNONMET cross .
Oh I knowNONMET , we needNONMET some more raisins don't we ?
Shall I goNONMET and buyNONMET some more raisins ?
Mm .
Difficult to pick up this isn't it ?
I wantNONMET one .
Oh you can't holdNONMET that ?
Right let's findNONMET the dog food .
Food for Jessie .
Right you stayNONMET there , mummy getNONMET the dog food .
We don't needNONMET cat food .
We don't needNONMET cat food , we haven't gotNONMET a cat , silly girl .
cat food .
We don't needNONMET cat food .
You only buyNONMET cat food if you've gotNONMET a cat .
Meow .
And we haven't , got a meow .
Meow , meow , meow , meow , meow , meow , meow , meow .
Just a minute getNONMET some of this .
Meow .
Mum .
Mm ?
What do you likeNONMET ?
That .
What ?
What's in here ?
What's in there , we've gotNONMET biscuits , I'm just goingNONMET to getNONMET some raisins , alright , they're just up here , you stayNONMET there .
Here we are .
I wantNONMET raisin .
You wantNONMET some now do you ?
Alright , I can open this up , I gotNONMET the little box , there you are , just a minute and , oh Charlotte , oh you are a menace , there you are , now you be quiet for a minute will you ?
Let's getNONMET some peas , I thinkNONMET that's it then .
Right , O K , now we can goNONMET , now we can goNONMET home .
Four addMET four and then Four addMET four equals eight .
Two times four equals eight , right ?
Yeah , like  that .
And then two And two times four is eight .
Erm I didn't writeNONMET it like  that then .
Right .
ShareMET the total of fives Yeah , I done , yeah I done Er Five , five , five is fifteen .
Five addMET five addMET five Erm is fifteen .
and then erm .
Right .
Is fifteen .
And then And sixes Sixes six si addMET six addMET six addMET six addMET six is thirty six .
Right .
Six times six is thirty I've done that one .
sixes .
That's it .
Okay ?
Erm this .
I'll leave that out .
Leave that out .
Add them up .
Mm .
That much closer can useNONMET those pictures .
TakeMET a look .
Are they near the box ?
Yeah .
Is that right ?
Four Four is twenty !
So it's four so Four times five is Twenty !
Four times five equal twenty .
Er two times six equals twelve .
Er four times three equal twelve .
Er , two additions leftMET .
Alright .
Those two addMET ?
So it's like one , two , one , two and one there and but put like erm seven addMET seven addMET seven is .
Is twenty one .
Yeah .
Seven addMET seven addMET seven is twenty one One .
And three times seven Right .
is twenty one and do it that way , five and fives .
Okay ?
Two addition  questions .
HangMET on .
Two ad yeah but you've gotNONMET right two multiple and two addition equations .
Not equations !
You toldNONMET us this !
But i thi , like these , these are equations .
So two addition equations er three times se seven plus seven plus seven is twenty one .
Right ?
Oh !
A so , but you can also goMET Yeah .
Yeah addMET three .
Three plus three plus three plus three plus three plus three is twenty one .
Do it that way on .
Do you followMET Yeah .
me ?
Yes I do .
Right .
Two multiplication Yeah .
and two addition .
Two addition .
Right .
So you , like , you .
Yes , that's right .
Then , it's like erm One .
seven times three , and three times seven .
And three times seven .
That's right .
And you do the same there .
Same on the addsMET .
And then , this we do likeNONMET Right , she wantsNONMET currency in two divisions in each , right ?
So it's one , two , three , four , fi That  multiplication is a yeah well divisions , okay , so it's twenty one shared by say , if that's one , two , three , four , five , six int it ?
Oh I knowNONMET what I've gotMET !
Six times three is eighteen or three times six is eighteen .
I knowNONMET what I've done .
I've put the , I thoughtNONMET it was er okay .
Six .
And division is sharedMET by .
So you gotNONMET to do eighteen sharedMET by six is three and eighteen Have you got sharedMET by three is six .
So like , you goMET one , two , three , four , five , six six times you swapMET Three .
six times three times three is eighteen is three times six .
Six .
Yeah , and and you got Six times three and three times six .
A and division is eighteen sharedMET by three is six , and eighteen sharedMET by six is three !
Yeah ?
GotMET it ?
I can not readNONMET .
Three sixes are eighteen !
You gotMET it ?
And you do the same there ?
HangMET on !
I haven't finishedNONMET thirty three one yet .
That's what I don't getMET .
Why do  multiplication equation for this similar line I don't a getMET how you do that ?
Is it , would you likeNONMET us to put It's fours int it ?
It's fours No two , four , six , eight , ten , twelve Yeah .
It That's twos .
No , but it's goingMET to fours look .
It's goingMET to fours .
Alright .
GoingMET into fours .
What would I putMET ?
Er one four is four , two fours are eight , and thre three fours is twelve .
As this is been sharedMET by lines int it ?
Yeah and it's on that one .
You do it likeNONMET that do you ?
Yeah , cos it's being sharedMET by Oh !
So it's , I would sayNONMET that is er nine times four equals thirty six .
And on that one is er , sixty three sharedMET by nine six time sixty three dividedMET by nine four .
No !
Sixty three dividedMET by nine is six !
WriteNONMET six through it .
Ten six in n it ?
No , it's ten sixes .
No , no waitNONMET a minute .
Nines .
What should nine times ten Emma ?
One nine is nine , two nines are eighteen , three nines are Twenty seven .
Four nines are thirty six , five nines are forty five , six nines fifty four , seven nine are sixty three .
Oh thankNONMET you .
Right .
Yeah , seven nines are sixty three .
HangMET on a minute !
Six nines are seven nines are sixty three .
HangMET on a minute !
Seven Seven nines are sixty three !
Sixty three .
Yeah .
You work them out like that look .
Yeah .
Well seven nines , well ee er , it takesMET you so long LookNONMET one , one nine is nine Yeah .
Two nines are eighteen .
So that one there is sixes into si thirty six .
I knowNONMET !
But I still don't getMET what you have to writeNONMET !
Well multiplication equation for this number line I would sayNONMET is er I've already toldNONMET you that .
No , but I don't knowNONMET what I have to , I have to writeNONMET !
Eight times four equals thirty six .
Don't getMET it .
Because it's one , two , three , four , five , six , seven eight , no sorry , nine times four is thirty six .
Nine times four equals thirty six .
Like this lookNONMET !
Write it out on a piece of paper and you'll and I'll write them down .
No !
You do it yourself !
I've toldNONMET you what to do .
You do it likeNONMET that .
I don't getMET it though !
I'll tellNONMET you if it's right .
I'm just writing the answers out for you !
I toldNONMET you what to do .
That's lazy !
Int it ?
You crafty cow !
If I giveNONMET you a bit of paper and the lot , yeah well you knowNONMET what to do and goNONMET to school and fillMET them in !
Couldn't it ?
No !
Hey ?
Right .
Your dinner's ready now .
She saysNONMET to me I've explainedNONMET to her how to do it and she saysNONMET yo I'll giveNONMET you a bit of paper you just write down the answers !
I knowNONMET .
You knowNONMET what she's gonNONMET na do goNONMET to school and putMET them down !
Crafty little sod she is !
I'll only with them .
That's squeaking and creaking isn't it ?
When you come in .
Good afternoon .
Just a spot of information with somebody .
Ooh out of breath from this hill .
Erm bungalow in St Peters Road .
Ah , thankNONMET you .
Can you giveMET me the particulars ?
Yes certainly .
Yeah .
yeah .
It's the one right bang on the main road ?
Yeah that's the one .
Yeah .
And anything else up to about forty five-ish .
From about thirty five to forty five .
Thirty five a snatch back or the repossession type thing I supposeNONMET .
one of my daughters is er What er sort of area ?
Oh .
Preferably Johnston er but it really doesn't matterNONMET .
It really doesn't matterNONMET to be honest with you .
How many bedrooms ?
In sayingNONMET that hangMET on , no , hangMET on .
laugh Do you wantNONMET it , do you wantNONMET a bungalow ?
It isn't , well yes .
Not necessarily , no no a house would do .
Er Milford There's Johnston Arford Not way out , you knowNONMET ?
Mm .
That's quite nice .
How many bedrooms ?
Preferably three but two get by with .
There's a new development in Johnston , that one .
Oh that one ye oh yes , I knowNONMET .
We knowNONMET that er yes when we were lookingNONMET .
Yeah .
Mm .
ThankNONMET you yes .
Okay .
is fifty six thousand you seeMET .
I thoughtNONMET it was goingNONMET to be , yes yes .
Do you wantNONMET the details anyway ?
Yes please .
Yes just in case .
One never knowsNONMET .
You never knowNONMET .
There we goMET .
One never knowsNONMET .
ThankNONMET you .
I thoughtNONMET it would be Erm Well that's the asking price .
How , how many beds did you sayNONMET ?
Preferably three but not essentially .
Two er one , if it's a two bedroom they're into the caravan outside .
For the spare bedroom , usual thing .
Mm .
cottage which quite nice .
Lower Thornton That's actually goneMET , been reducedMET now to Where the hell's that ?
Lower Thornton As you er approachNONMET you knowNONMET the Horse and Jockey Milford ?
Yes we do , yes .
You turnNONMET right .
Yeah .
Oh which way are we approachingNONMET it ?
And .
From this end or ?
From this end , yeah .
Yeah , goMET on .
You turnNONMET right You turnNONMET right and you goNONMET down it and you'll seeNONMET a sign for Lower Thornton .
Oh thankNONMET you , yes .
It's down there .
That been reducedMET to forty four thousand I seeMET , yes , yeah .
been reducedMET .
Do you wantNONMET me to writeNONMET that on ?
Please yes .
ThankNONMET you .
ExcuseNONMET me please .
Sorry .
I'm so sorry .
ThankNONMET you .
knock and shoveNONMET me but I always getNONMET in the way .
laugh There you goMET .
ThankNONMET you .
Right okay .
Erm Well my wife and I have only been here , livingNONMET here ooh just over twelve months now so we don't really knowNONMET the You don't knowNONMET the area , no .
Not frightfully well , no .
Oh , where are you from ?
From Manchester .
Been Oh whereabouts ?
Chorlton or Chorlton cum Hardy if you wantNONMET the full glory .
Don't tellNONMET me you were too ?
Whereabou I used to I used to l live in Stockport Stockport .
Oh or what have you yes .
Yeah .
Did you indeed ?
Mm .
Road or ?
Yeah .
I knowNONMET .
laugh moveNONMET down in October .
Did you really ?
Good gracious .
And of the two places Mm ?
of the two places , where would you sooner be ?
Here .
.
Should have comeNONMET here what I thinkNONMET you needNONMET to I thinkNONMET you needNONMET to really of been somewhere else before Yes , I acceptNONMET that .
to realizeNONMET , you appreciateNONMET .
Yes .
Y you're absolutely right there .
You really are .
Yes .
Cos er you feelMET as you ju people moan about this sort of area they just don't realizeNONMET how .
Mm .
How many think of the credit column .
Precisely .
Yeah .
Well our milkman , to be honest with you , it got to the stage where he wouldn't collectNONMET milk at night to collectNONMET the cash at night .
No .
In .
Yeah Chorlton can be Chorlton's on the border of erm oh god Stretford Yeah there's Stretford isn't there ?
No but what MollyrangeNONMET Stretford , Mollyrange er Molly Mollyrange .
That's the bit isn't it ?
I , I can rememberNONMET Mollyrange sixty years ago and it was a very very different place , between you and me it really was .
Yeah .
Mosside wasn't too bad sixty years ago but now , good gracious .
Well you wouldn't dareNONMET leaveNONMET your car parked .
Oh no !
Oh the wife and I wentMET around Mosside the day after the riots there and , do you rememberNONMET the riots ?
Perhaps you don't .
No .
In the coloured area .
They were smashing shops and burning cars and what Oh yeah .
You could feelMET the atmosphere when you were satNONMET in the car .
Mm .
Well we Disturbing .
It was that bad that we wentNONMET when I boughtNONMET my house in Manchester Mm .
Mm .
we wentMET er round MollyrangeNONMET to getNONMET to you knowNONMET the Oh yeah .
laugh the erm that good place that sellsMET secondhand er or damagedNONMET erm Range Warehouse Range Warehouse , that's it yeah .
Mm .
Very good .
Mm .
Very good And er value for money , yeah .
thing is that you knowNONMET we were at w we , actually we gotNONMET lost and were askingNONMET directions .
People people were runningMET away two lexical units; [run away]=phrasal verb you .
Yeah .
Yes .
Yes .
Yes .
I knowNONMET .
I meanNONMET it was so funny because it was Yes .
laugh a sunny day Yeah , and yet mm .
and and yet you knowNONMET it was a sunny day .
Nick had  his sunglasses on , he must have lookedNONMET a bit touchedMET .
laugh we just stoppedNONMET and bloke Yeah .
one woman , sorry , that literally ranNONMET away from us .
They completely ranNONMET away .
It was unbelievable .
Yes I can believeNONMET it , yes .
Yeah yeah .
Well the the really ?
Yeah .
There's a friend of my wife and I she's , what age is she now ?
Well at the time she was in her very late thirties , schoolteacher .
And she boughtNONMET a house in Mollyrange .
I didn't knowNONMET about it , I didn't even knowNONMET she was lookingNONMET for one then .
Er we sawNONMET her one day she saidNONMET oh I've gotNONMET the keys by the way .
I saidNONMET oh , keys for where ?
You knowNONMET .
Oh I've gotNONMET a house in .
I saidNONMET oh , whereabouts ?
laugh One side of the road there were three brothels and on the other side there were four .
She was a schoolteacher .
She'd no idea , very innocent , very er church , you knowNONMET ?
Oh yes , father was a parson and Mm .
she lastedNONMET there about six months , that was all .
Mm mm .
Yeah .
Cos it's er it's weird really , it's like a good ar good area and bad areas .
Oh it's very patchy .
But it's interesting , Mollyrange , if you drawMET a line down the centre Pakistanis on that side and Jamaicans on that side .
Seriously .
Seriously .
So what madeMET you wantNONMET to moveNONMET down here ?
Well we've wantedNONMET to moveNONMET for twenty five years possibly .
But you knowNONMET how it is , it's family ties and kids growing up and then they grow up and have families of their own , then you getNONMET tiedMET to the ch grandchildren or what have you .
I've been pushingMET for a long time but erm down here ?
Well I have a brother-in-law living in Stainton He's livedNONMET there , he retiredMET there some what , ooh fifteen years ago , more than that .
He'd been pressingMET me to comeMET down here for a long time .
When I used to bringNONMET my wife Mm .
drive down drop her off at in-laws .
Cup of tea , turnNONMET the car round and go back .
I couldn't standNONMET the bloke at the time .
An ex Manchester lion board of directors , very very full of himself .
Mm .
He'd been usedNONMET to having chars and minions runningNONMET round him .
TookMET him a while now he's a very nice chap .
laugh TookMET him a while to calm down .
laugh But now yeah it tookMET him a while to calm down but he's a very nice fellow now , very nice chap .
And erm we searchedNONMET over north Wales first of all but phew no thankNONMET you .
Extension really of Manchester in a way , north Wales .
Mm .
Mm .
Then we er gotNONMET a letter from ah my daughters , one of my daughters one of my many daughters married to a coastguard in Milford .
Mm .
Erm she spottedNONMET a house in the paper , sentNONMET it up .
I saidNONMET oh comeMET on , we might as well goMET down and have a look .
Mm .
And we wentMET down , likedNONMET it and that was it .
Mm .
Been down here ever since .
laugh And regrettedNONMET that we hadn't comeNONMET before .
Yeah .
Oh well Oh seriously .
at least you're here now .
laugh Yes .
Yes .
Right , okay .
Right .
ThankNONMET you very much my love .
If you fancyNONMET viewingNONMET any of them just giveMET us a call .
Oh indeed yes , that's right .
Well I'll concernNONMET it with my daughter first of all naturally .
Mhm .
Cos I d I hateNONMET wastingNONMET , I rememberNONMET when we were sellingNONMET ours , the time wasters , the people that had no intention of buying .
There's actually one there , Magic Cottage that's quite nice .
A magic cottage ?
laugh Did I hearNONMET right ?
M A G I C , magic ?
Magic .
Mm , it's calledNONMET .
Good gracious .
Erm there you goMET .
Again it's fifty four so , but you never knowNONMET .
Well you never knowNONMET , yes exactly , yeah .
Oh you've gotNONMET a pretty picture for it ?
Oh it's just comeMET in , obviously yeah .
Mm .
Obviously just comeMET in .
That remindsNONMET me .
When we boughtNONMET our house , thankNONMET you .
ThankNONMET you very much indeed .
Erm we had the original full blow up Mm .
from the estate agents .
And erm we sentNONMET it to well one of my other sons in Australia there and he was thrilled to bits .
oh you did very well with your photography .
I thoughtNONMET laugh laugh Yes .
Just too late I seeMET .
Never mindNONMET I'll comeNONMET Oh well never mindNONMET you'll come back later I'll come back later .
ThankNONMET you very much for your time love .
Bubye .
Bubye .
Bubye .
laugh ForgiveNONMET me smiling but does everybody do that , fall over the step there ?
Same as me .
There's laugh not much of me but .
Erm what if anything have you , erm these are enquiries I'm makingMET on behalf of my daughter .
Anything from about thirty five to forty five .
Mm .
Two bedroomed , no ?
Round Arford , Johnston and Milford Yeah we've gotNONMET quite a few actually .
Have you ?
Mm .
Good good good good good .
ThankNONMET you .
laugh Erm I never realizedNONMET it's first time price .
Shall I just give you out a load and Give me out a load , yes .
And we can browseMET and Yeah there's quite a lot actually in that price range of homes .
Are there really ?
Oh Yeah .
Mm .
Mm .
Oh lookNONMET at that , thankNONMET you .
Very well oiled runners on those er Yes .
drawers haven't you ?
Bit too much They getNONMET a bit carried away actually .
Yeah .
That middle drawer over there keepsNONMET comingMET out all the time .
laugh Mind of it's own job , yeah ?
Yeah we've gotMET a poltergeist Yeah yeah .
Funny I'd just been sayingNONMET that , just been readingNONMET a book allegedly writtenNONMET by erm Uri Geller , you knowNONMET the Oh yeah ?
and he claimsNONMET to be er able to moveNONMET things and do the poltergeist stuntMET , you knowNONMET ?
Yeah ?
Mm .
laugh ClaimsMET to be .
Yeah I've seenNONMET him on the telly Oh yes , yes .
They reckonMET if you concentrateMET with him you can do the same Indeed yes .
He claimsNONMET that's been done .
Exactly .
That's right , yes .
Some people can , yeah .
Mm .
Well , yeah .
In his last chapter in the book he claimsNONMET he did a a beam me up scottie business and Yeah exactly , yes .
That I findMET a little bit hard to believeNONMET .
One minute he was shall we sayNONMET in Arford , next minute woof , he'd shotMET to Johnston through somebody's window ?
Oh !
laugh Yeah I knowNONMET .
Yes exactly .
Mm .
That is pushingMET it .
ThinkNONMET thinkNONMET thinkNONMET , she saysNONMET .
ThinkNONMET .
Yes .
Is Haycastle too far ?
Er I I don't knowNONMET Johnston frightfu er Johnston !
I don't knowNONMET er only be a matter of MindNONMET you that's the other direction to Johnston .
?
Well possibly , I don't knowNONMET love .
She might .
Erm Erm Well she might well do .
You've givenNONMET a goodly little pile here .
Well there's quite a few .
Yeah .
Mm .
A niece of mine living in tellsNONMET me that it's pickingMET up slightly , the property market .
Would you agreeNONMET with that or I findMET that hard to believeNONMET .
No .
Mm .
No I don't thinkNONMET so , no .
Not really , no .
It's No , no .
People are holding off now cuttingMET back Mm .
And , exactly , yes , yes .
Quite , yes .
Yes , yeah .
phone rings There is some property moving but Mm .
nothing exciting really .
Do you wantNONMET to ditchNONMET me and grabNONMET the phone before it Erm I'll giveNONMET you those Alright , thankNONMET you .
Yes .
Marvellous .
Good gracious .
Yes a goodly pile .
Quite a wide range .
Erm Erm erm Would she be willing to ?
Oh indeed yes .
Yes .
Yes .
You're goingMET to an awful lot of trouble for me love .
That's alright .
No problem at all .
There you goMET .
I thinkNONMET that's about it that price range .
Fine .
ThankNONMET you very much indeed .
Basically all of them are you knowNONMET modernized .
That one needsMET Yeah .
a new kitchen .
It needsMET tidying up but you can seeMET that the price And the stuff rippingNONMET out the front .
Oh I hateNONMET those things , personally , but still , there we are .
Matter of , exactly yes .
I agreeNONMET with you .
There we are .
ThankNONMET you .
Er yes , I s suspectNONMET they must have paidNONMET a lot of money to have that done too .
Yeah .
Mm .
laugh Well , yeah .
in that case , yeah .
?
Er at this stage I don't thinkNONMET so to be honest with you because can giveMET us a ring .
Well exactly , yes , she can giveMET you a ring erm or I could giveMET you a ring for that matter erm .
expensive business for her , phoningNONMET from Manchester , .
laugh Yes yeah erm no there's little point just now , goMET on then she's thoughtNONMET of something else .
Oh .
Ooh .
There's enough to keepNONMET me goingNONMET for the week there isn't there ?
Yeah .
laugh ForgiveNONMET me for sayingNONMET so but the lighting in here is appalling , you don't you getMET headaches ?
Sorry ?
Don't you getMET headaches from Yeah , now and again .
Yeah I thoughtNONMET you would .
Terrible light that .
Mm .
Doesn't helpMET with the dark ceiling , that soaksMET it up doesn't it ?
Yeah .
Mm .
Well we're gonNONMET na be expanding into next  door  erm What when the property market picksMET up ?
Well well we're gonNONMET na do it anyway cos we just haven't gotNONMET enough room Oh I seeMET .
Oh yeah .
Mm .
market really .
Really ?
Is it really ?
Good gracious me .
Mm .
Mm .
Erm I could No sorry .
GoMET on , yeah .
giveNONMET you a form if she wantsNONMET to takeNONMET it and fillMET it in , right ?
Fine , thankNONMET you .
Yeah , I can post it to her .
GiveMET her a tinkle and er yeah .
Well that'll saveMET .
Mhm .
Yes .
If she wantsNONMET to goNONMET on the mailing list , just cut that bit off and fillMET that in and post it on us .
Fine thankNONMET you .
Well yes exac thankNONMET you , because my wife writesNONMET to her practically every week Yeah .
and she can bungNONMET this in with the er Yeah .
I meanNONMET a letter doesn't Well yes .
Quite , yes , yes .
ThankNONMET you my love .
Fine .
Yes indeed .
ThankNONMET you .
It's cheaper than phoningNONMET isn't it ?
Aha .
Yes it is .
Mm .
Right .
You can get back  to you're er whatever you're getting back to .
I du n noNONMET .
laugh PretendingNONMET to be busy .
Yeah .
Or are you busy ?
Well I'm drawingMET lines .
Drawing , oh well !
Marking out boundaries .
Ma oh !
It's gettingNONMET more and more important as it goesMET .
I'll tryNONMET not to fallNONMET down the step when I goNONMET .
laugh ThankNONMET you my love .
laugh Goodbye .
Bubye .
Why didn't you wantNONMET to buyNONMET the same one again mum ?
Well I just kind of was runningNONMET round the shop because I was laugh You gotNONMET the first one you could seeNONMET .
I had to goNONMET and collectNONMET grandma you seeMET to takeNONMET her to the station , and I didn't have an awful lot of time so I just sort of ranNONMET round and collectedNONMET whatever I gotNONMET .
Cos we wouldn't have wanted grandma to missMET her train would we ?
if we did ?
No , bus .
What , missMET the train ?
No bus ?
She'd have to getMET the next one .
She had to goNONMET on a bus actually .
GetMET the train .
Cos they don't have trains from Redditch Mummy .
Do you knowNONMET why ?
Mm ?
PassNONMET the marge .
They only had them from Daddy's gotNONMET the marge .
From Bar Green Can I have the marge ?
Yes .
Is that is that What a mess .
after erm It's between Redditch and Mulbridge No , between Redditch and Birmingham .
Yes .
Between Redditch and Birmingham .
Mm our daffodils are coming out nicely .
They are .
I hopeNONMET the wind doesn't blow them over .
Be a pity .
There's at least one blown over there isn't there ?
Oh where ?
Oh yeah .
Where ?
We'll have to goNONMET and collectNONMET it , putNONMET it in a vase on the side .
Where's one blown over ?
There lookNONMET .
A new one ?
Mm .
Mm .
It's so windy at the moment .
March winds .
The others seemNONMET to have stoodMET up quite well over on the other side .
Where ?
Where ?
One of them's dead .
Which one's dead ?
The one which is f pointed erm straight ahead .
Mm .
SeeNONMET what you meanNONMET .
It's a bit dead .
It is .
LooksNONMET as if it and the wind's gotMET it again .
Mum , it's not very nice when the wind hitsMET it is it mum ?
No .
Still , we can always pickNONMET them and bringNONMET them inside .
I rememberNONMET doing that once .
I rememberNONMET finding one and puttingNONMET the vase on there .
Mm .
So where is it now ?
It will be dead by now .
You're talkingNONMET about last year aren't you ?
Last year's flowers aren't around now .
Here you are .
Right .
ThankNONMET you .
These are the same bulbs though that have madeMET a new flower this year .
Where's the marmalade ?
I tookNONMET a bit .
Why they keepMET on makingMET new bulbs ?
They do it , well they do it every year .
Can I have some marmalade please ?
Ah .
The daffodils over there in that little bed seemNONMET to be a bit later than all the others , I don't knowNONMET .
Have some marmalade .
Have some marmalade .
I'm doing it a funny way this time .
I'd of thoughtNONMET they would have gotMET just as much sun and rain as everything else .
That's a little one .
Mum .
LookNONMET what I've done .
marmite .
Mm .
Very posh .
Candles .
Do you usually do that ?
If you askNONMET mummy she'll What do you wantNONMET me to do ?
I didn't make that .
Oh good .
What do you wantNONMET ?
Do you wantNONMET some er marmite on it ?
You did .
Mm .
Gone a funny shape .
Daddy hasn't seenNONMET the new Rosie and Jim .
True .
Lot of things daddy hasn't seenNONMET .
I knowNONMET .
Inspector Morse .
I knowNONMET .
laugh few weeks before we have time Have you gotNONMET sp lots of spare tapes ?
No .
laugh .
We'll have to have another one next Wednesday .
Are they on every week or are they once a fortnight ?
I'm not sure actually .
And you haven't seenNONMET the the puppet show .
I haven't seenNONMET one about a puppet show .
Is that where Mm .
Rosie and Jim mm Rosie and Jim wentNONMET to a puppet show did they ?
They goNONMET to Stratford .
Yeah a a a and a lion .
Stratford ?
Do they ?
And there's a lion is there ?
And a and a lion .
He tookNONMET an omelette .
Omelette .
An omelette ?
It was quite good actually .
And a man came back and .
Oh .
And Skinlid went back .
Pardon ?
Skinlid .
The skin ?
Well he's calledNONMET Skinlid .
Is he ?
I don't knowNONMET .
I didn't watchNONMET it that closely .
Have some more tea .
ate it all up .
Mhm .
So if it's a puppet show did Rosie and Jim do some puppeting ?
puppet .
No .
They were in the audience shouting and cheeringNONMET from what I sawNONMET .
Where they ?
Mhm .
Then they wentNONMET round the back though didn't they ?
Did they ?
Mm .
They runNONMET round the back and played with the puppets .
laugh When the show was endedNONMET Nobody mentionedNONMET that they were puppets themselves .
laugh That's what I callNONMET a miracle .
I do that .
I don't thinkNONMET they likeNONMET it .
Mm .
It was nice to seeNONMET Stratford .
I wonderNONMET if that they filmedNONMET that at the time when the boat was in Stratford .
Do you rememberNONMET when we wentNONMET to Yeah .
Yeah .
we nearly wentNONMET to seeNONMET it but we missedMET .
Yeah .
Cos it had movedMET by the time we gotNONMET there .
So it might be then they might have tapedNONMET it ?
Mm .
It could well have been .
But mum it's a bit late from that .
Well it's always takesMET a long time .
They they do these things months beforehand .
And then it comesNONMET on the television later on .
How to getMET to knowNONMET about these things .
Mm .
This chap we were sittingNONMET next to involved in all these canal projects .
Oh yes , that's right .
He was .
Apparently he's a director of various canal preservation bodies and things .
Oh .
He was certainly into canals in a big way .
Yeah .
Yeah he is .
Mm .
You'll have to getNONMET to knowNONMET i is he in your ?
No , he's at Solihull .
Oh Solihull .
What was he calledNONMET ?
Jonathan .
Jonathan .
He was a pleasant chap I thoughtNONMET .
Oh yes .
As these chaps goMET .
laugh It was interesting discussingNONMET various chaps after Oh right .
only just sort of seeNONMET them occasionally to getMET the inside stories to .
have drunkNONMET .
Mm .
How's Julia ?
She was okay this week .
Well , she's a totally snowedMET under Well , it's not with work .
surprising .
Like I had to giveMET her some top priorities yesterday as she wasn't goingNONMET to be about .
Actually she did very well on one of those .
She did far better Did you tellNONMET her ?
Oh yes .
Yes .
Well I madeMET sure my boss toldNONMET her , that's .
Cos he was desperate for cos he neededNONMET an answer for Monday morning for Dave .
It's goingNONMET to be thinkingNONMET about science .
Dave's erm wife produced a baby last week Oh .
so he's having a week off you knowNONMET to changeNONMET nappies or whatever .
It might be or it might not .
laugh Mum , is the video on ?
I just , I only pressedNONMET hold nothing else .
Well you're not to Well since someone else switched it off I should thinkNONMET .
Why ?
I'm not quite sure what happensNONMET you seeMET .
That's why I just pressedNONMET but cos there's a little line .
hearNONMET the sound of the video .
When ?
Well I can hearNONMET it now .
Oh .
Yeah I'm wonderingNONMET whether it's playingMET to itself , with the television off .
Do you thinkNONMET that's likely ?
Or does it not do it ?
No , cos it's not gotMET the aerial it would do .
It would do .
Would it ?
Oh dear .
It's not gotMET the aerial in .
No .
Shouldn't It is it's on it's on the video .
It's just that I can actually hearNONMET it .
I can actually hearNONMET the motor on Oh .
on turningNONMET round It's on the video .
I presumeNONMET what happensNONMET when it's not on it's all geared up ready to Mummy .
Daddy .
It's on the video .
What's on the video ?
Telly .
Yeah .
Yeah when er all which is on now is the blue button .
Right .
It's the blue The blue button's on but nothing else .
Right .
The blue button's okay .
Where are you goingNONMET to ?
Cloth .
Right .
laugh Mum , why aren't you gonNONMET na putMET your microphone on .
Well it might as well stayMET there .
Why ?
Well it can hearMET us all then .
No that noise daddy Yes .
What was that ?
isn't that it's that .
Ah but that wasn't on before was it ?
Cos mummy only just come down for breakfast .
No , just rememberedNONMET and rushedNONMET off and ge to getNONMET it .
But it's true , it does makeMET a noise .
There's lots of noises , lots of electrical things .
seeNONMET me .
The fridge madeNONMET some really weird noises yesterday .
I thoughtNONMET oh what's goingMET on .
Can you seeNONMET me now .
Can I seeNONMET you ?
Oh was it vibrating ?
There's a little bit more just there .
Yeah .
It does .
It a load or Is it knockingMET on something ?
Oh .
On the top .
as you knowNONMET there's a lot of stuff On the top .
In other words mummy , cleanNONMET your fridge .
That's it .
Right .
Hands now .
All clean .
LetNONMET me have a look .
That's that's not bad .
The the fridge is a bit Other one .
That looksNONMET a bit sticky that one , at the back , does it ?
one .
No ?
No .
LookMET Tim , we'll have to windNONMET it soon , daddy can workNONMET the new one .
You're goingNONMET to watchNONMET Rosie and Jim dear .
Am I ?
I'm supposed to wash up aren't I ?
That's alright .
I'll wash up .
No you Mm ?
Mummy wash up .
Yes .
laugh What am I goingNONMET to do ?
And you watchNONMET Me watch Rosie and Jim ?
Yeah cos you madeNONMET the breakfast .
That's true , I did makeNONMET the breakfast .
Did you likeNONMET the breakfast ?
laugh ComeMET on .
Right .
I haven't gotNONMET my glasses .
I won't be able to seeNONMET it .
Oh .
It's PC Pinkerton anyway , it's not even Rosie and Jim .
No but that's why I saidNONMET wind it back .
Oh .
Well windNONMET it back ten minutes .
Can you do that , do you knowNONMET how to do that ?
No .
You watchNONMET Well I can't now it's too late .
Come on dad .
Yes .
Right .
I'm gonNONMET na getNONMET your glasses or No no no no Tim .
Don't you touchNONMET my glasses .
Please .
Please .
Something weird is happeningNONMET there .
I knowNONMET that's Mummy wash up .
It was when you were playingNONMET with it with your fingers , do you rememberNONMET ?
Anyway it won't matterNONMET .
We can useNONMET some pliers or something to bendNONMET it back .
Hello hello hello hello Mummy this is for winter this isn't it ?
Hello .
Your er ?
Yes .
I don't supposeNONMET we could have it For for the chilly days .
Well in the summer you won't needNONMET jumpers will you likeNONMET this ?
No .
Hopefully .
If we have a good summer .
MindNONMET you in the evening , if it getsNONMET quite chilly in the evenings so it might be a good jumper to wearNONMET in the evenings when we goNONMET for our evening walks by the sea .
Oh what a lovely thought daddy .
Next time we goNONMET to the sea .
Oh it's the clip .
He's been playingNONMET with it , he's bentNONMET it out so it .
It's on at the moment though .
I triedNONMET doing it with my fingers but I don't knowNONMET .
ThankNONMET you dear .
Very helpful .
Very helpful .
Oh .
Mum , what about givingNONMET him something for being very GivingNONMET who something ?
What do you meanNONMET ?
Here , I'm gonNONMET na whisperNONMET you something .
GoMET on .
GiveNONMET you what ?
Why ?
Oh I seeMET .
Oh right .
Biscuits .
No no .
Nothing to do with biscuits .
Right .
We'll have to goNONMET Nothing to do with biscuits .
do we needNONMET to goNONMET upstairs first ?
Er , I thinkNONMET we should .
ComeMET on .
laugh Chips .
laugh Chips .
I thinkNONMET we should have chips , don't you ?
MacDonalds .
Mac Erm have you gotNONMET the purse mummy ?
Erm I don't knowNONMET .
Have you gotNONMET some money ?
I haven't gotNONMET any money .
It's alright .
I've gotNONMET loads of money somewhere .
It's just a matter of It's stopped rainingNONMET .
Good .
Has John gotNONMET a new car do you thinkNONMET ?
Oh well I sawNONMET that on Friday .
In fact yesterday we saidNONMET I wonderNONMET if he's gotNONMET a new car or whether he's gotMET visitors .
I should imagineNONMET it's a new car .
Very posh isn't it ?
Is it new ?
I meanNONMET It's J reg is it ?
I I I I toldNONMET you to .
Will it fitNONMET in the garage ?
It's a bit bigger than our ford escort .
It won't mummy .
I don't thinkNONMET it will .
laugh If it doesn't mum anyway it wouldn't fitNONMET in the garage because there's another car in there .
Oh that's a point .
That's a bit tricky .
Well we thinkNONMET that that might be a new car .
Yeah , we thinkNONMET it's .
cos we're nearly there .
We're not nearly there .
We haven't even startedNONMET .
Nearly there .
GotNONMET to be quick .
did you actually goMET to sleep mummy ?
I did .
Did you ?
I was absolutely whackedNONMET out .
You've done very well .
Well I haven't .
You've done all the meals .
laugh Dad , could you walkNONMET it to MacDonalds ?
Well you could .
It would be a little bit far for us .
But we could if we neededNONMET to .
Wouldn't be too bad cos you'd goNONMET down by the Jolly Farmer .
Yeah .
You'd have to walkNONMET like Gemma walksNONMET to school wouldn't you ?
Mm .
Where does Gemma liveNONMET ?
Gemma livesNONMET Oakenshaw Yeah , near MacDonalds .
Near MacDonalds dad .
She livesNONMET right near MacDonalds doesn't she ?
She does actually .
laugh Wonder if she goesNONMET to MacDonalds every night for her tea ?
No .
But she could walkNONMET it from her house couldn't she ?
She could .
Because it's not far .
Yeah all she has to do is goNONMET go round her bit round just a normal road , across the road down a little bit and she's there .
Mm .
It's not very far daddy , is it daddy ?
A teeny bit .
It's only round the corner from her isn't it mum ?
It's only .
cough I foundNONMET it over here .
I can't seeNONMET it .
There it is .
There it is .
There's a lot of people there .
Do you thinkNONMET we'll getNONMET a seat ?
Ooh there's a lot of cars .
I seeNONMET MacDonalds .
There's not normally that many people there are there ?
No .
It's What ?
it's a bit full .
Oh it looksNONMET crowded .
Perhaps there's a party .
It's not a party .
Perhaps there's only one person in each car at MacDonalds .
laugh That's true .
I can't thinkNONMET that one person in a car on their own would wantNONMET to goNONMET to MacDonalds too often .
Like a mum or a dad or Everybody must have thoughtNONMET what a dismal day this is .
Mm .
Let's gotNONMET to MacDonalds for our tea .
Mm it is quite full though .
How do you knowNONMET which way It is .
Are we gonNONMET na getNONMET i I don't thinkNONMET we're gonNONMET na getNONMET in .
Course we are .
What ?
I've never knownNONMET it that full before .
Where to parkNONMET ?
There's a space .
There aren't any spaces .
Well just keepNONMET going round .
There was some space at the other end actually .
There's a space .
Just missedNONMET a space .
I don't thinkNONMET we did Tim .
No there weren't any .
No .
I thinkNONMET there's one just over here .
Oh How you space ?
Where ?
There .
That's the one I sawNONMET when I was comingNONMET in .
Don't knowNONMET if you're meantNONMET to useNONMET it .
Well Are those erm queuing up though ?
Yeah .
Oh .
I'd better getNONMET out this side I thinkNONMET .
Why ?
No , your side I meanNONMET .
Cos it's flowers and things .
laugh I the door .
SeeNONMET Ronald MacDonald in person here on Sunday the twenty second of March .
I'll go round the door .
Appearances at noon and three PM .
I thoughtNONMET the man was dead .
I'm goingNONMET out here .
Who is dead ?
Ronald MacDonald .
Isn't he dead , Ronald MacDonald ?
Or perhaps it's sort of some dressed up character .
Don't !
Okay .
Are you comingNONMET Christopher or are you goingNONMET to sitNONMET here to have your meal ?
Just waitNONMET Tim cos there's lots of cars .
I just goingNONMET go round .
Well just goNONMET and standNONMET on that path there cos there's another another car then .
StayNONMET on the path .
WaitNONMET !
just there .
Okay just stayNONMET , Tim !
StayNONMET On that path , goMET on .
StayNONMET there .
Right stayNONMET there , don't moveNONMET .
Yes .
There's a car there .
Okay , right .
Away you goNONMET .
Ah be quick .
LookNONMET dad .
Yeah sit down .
ComeMET on .
Mum , how many straws do we needNONMET ?
How many what ?
How many straws do we needNONMET ?
I don't knowNONMET .
Shall I askNONMET daddy and Tim ?
How many we might needNONMET ?
Yeah .
Twenty chicken nuggets please .
Twenty chicken nuggets .
Any sauce ?
And er yeah tomato ketchup and sweet and sour please .
I can have two of each can't I ?
And french fries .
Yeah two large .
And two teas two teas two oranges .
Erm that's it .
Do you wantNONMET a straw ?
Mum do you wantNONMET a straw ?
straw .
Do you wantNONMET a straw ?
Oy mum .
Do you wantNONMET a straw mum ?
Would you not shoutNONMET at me .
What ?
Don't shoutNONMET at me .
Do you wantNONMET a straw please ?
Mummy do you wantNONMET a straw ?
I don't wantNONMET a straw , no .
I I I I wantNONMET a straw .
Mum mum mummy I wantNONMET a straw .
Right .
Two thirteen change .
ThankNONMET you .
Dave do you wantNONMET to takeNONMET to that lady in the corner .
Can I helpNONMET anyone ?
Mum can I takeNONMET these to the table ?
Yes , just goNONMET and sitNONMET with daddy please .
Now stop I'll takeNONMET them .
No .
Why ?
No thanks .
Just milk .
Can you two goNONMET and sit down with daddy please cos this is gettingNONMET silly .
I wantNONMET to watchNONMET .
No .
GoNONMET and sitNONMET with daddy .
I wantNONMET to watchNONMET you .
GoNONMET and sitNONMET with daddy .
No cos you keepNONMET shoutingNONMET at me .
Now goNONMET away , please .
shout at you .
Now please .
GoNONMET .
GoMET on please .
.
No .
I shall just sayNONMET I'm sorry we don't wantNONMET this meal and we'll goNONMET away .
GoNONMET and sit down with daddy please .
Okay ?
french fries .
This thing , is it on , off ?
laugh Has it been on ?
It's not been on , no , I've just switched it on .
Right , toast and marmite , times two .
I thinkNONMET everything on this erm , machine is to do with food , don't you ?
Probably is .
You needNONMET to sort of stopMET and talkNONMET when you have food .
Yes .
Yes please cup of tea are makingNONMET it then ?
good !
I did manageMET to sortMET out the food for tomorrow and Did you really ?
That's very clever !
Well I thoughtNONMET .
Did you manageMET to do alright ?
Yeah .
Found .
I meanNONMET pinched one of for starters , that makesMET a difference .
Did you tryNONMET it did you ?
No !
Ah ho , A pathetic film on , I don't Ah !
knowNONMET what it was about , but it was pathetic !
Ah !
Mm .
What's happeningNONMET tomorrow ?
What do you meanNONMET , what's happeningNONMET tomorrow ?
Well what is it tomorrow morning and evening and things .
What ?
What is it tomorrow morning and evening , and what are we goingNONMET to do in the afternoon without ?
!
laugh I knowNONMET we'll copeNONMET but what are you goingNONMET to do ?
Are we inviting anyone ?
I knowNONMET we're not inviting anybody for lunch Christmas day couldn't copeNONMET with that but it would be quite to have them in the afternoon can't copeNONMET with the people !
Oh yeah .
SupposeNONMET we should do something , yeah .
Well that's what I was thinkingNONMET , perhaps we could goNONMET with somebody somewhere .
You knowNONMET , like by a canal or something .
Perhaps , well if it's snowingNONMET it won't be quite the same .
That's right .
laugh Conducive to trippingMET about !
But if it's quite nice weather , it would be nice to inviteNONMET somebody along I >expectNONMET .
They could just .
Stratford ?
Yeah the Stratford Warriors runningMET about every six weeks something like that .
Is it six weeks since we sawNONMET the last one then ?
They didn't , they we , they have them more frequently now and they're gettingNONMET even more and more infrequent now for the rest of the year .
Mm .
And next one .
That's Mother's Day twenty second .
Is it ?
No .
Mother's Day a fortnight Twenty ninth .
Somebody will organizeNONMET a party for Tuesday Yeah they wantNONMET a party piece on Tuesday .
It's alright you don't have to , of cake .
If I don't bakeNONMET them now my mother .
Yeah well tellNONMET your mother .
I'll have to Yeah I will .
getNONMET one !
And it better be a nice one !
Pop into Marks and Spencers they have some amazing shapes in Marks and Spencers that the children will enjoyNONMET .
Really ?
MindNONMET you it might be expensive .
Tesco's are probably cheaper .
You rememberNONMET that Tom and Jerry I gotNONMET for Tim ?
Because I couldn't be bothered to cookNONMET it .
Well , leaveMET it up to me , I'll seeMET what I can getNONMET I'll getNONMET for the party .
ThankNONMET you dear .
Is that alright ?
Yeah .
I'll getNONMET you some .
And I'll just makeNONMET the rest of the with salad in .
You're not supposed to .
I've toldNONMET you what we're gonNONMET na for Christopher haven't I ?
I knowNONMET , he wentNONMET to school to do Yeah .
housework .
Is that naughty ?
Thursday morning .
Right , Christopher will be back too !
laugh I wishNONMET I could I'd likeNONMET to You what ?
Out at the meeting again on Monday night .
On Monday ?
Where are you goingNONMET Monday ?
GoingNONMET to Sue's house .
Oh right the big housewife !
The housewife mhm .
like cookingNONMET this week .
Ah , I'm having Jane for a piano lesson , aren't I ?
What day ?
Which day ?
Monday .
Are you ?
Oh well So that fitsMET in quite well I couldn't rememberNONMET what I was doing on Monday but we saidNONMET , sort of tentatively Monday would be probably quite a good day I thinkNONMET .
Better than Thursday anyway .
So could Tuesday night be Inspector Morse night ?
Yeah cos my mum will be here then .
Oh right can we not takeNONMET her home ?
laugh Unpaid !
Well she'll We shall seeMET !
have been here all day , won't she ?
So she might wantNONMET to goNONMET home !
laugh laugh she wantsNONMET to tellNONMET us all about her wedding Could you tellNONMET her we're goingNONMET to watchNONMET Inspector Morse !
for the third or fourth time !
Will she have watchedNONMET Inspector Morse ?
She won't of watchedNONMET it , cos it's boundMET to be on a Wednesday night !
Does she likeNONMET Inspector Morse ?
I don't thinkNONMET she watchesNONMET it normally .
No , she probably doesn't likeNONMET it .
A bit spicy !
I betMET she would , she lovesNONMET anything like that !
Bit of a body !
MindNONMET you , it might be too complicated !
It was I rememberNONMET readingNONMET in the paper that it's been it's been filmedNONMET at a house which no one's ever been allowedNONMET to goNONMET in even the great sort of one of these country mansions , it was not Bradley Hall Right .
And even people who writeNONMET about If it was not Bradley Hall , it can't be Bradley Hall again , they're always goingNONMET in there !
Well that's fine .
It was some country mansion in Oxfordshire you knowNONMET ?
Mm .
It's as you comeNONMET off the And how did and they getMET permission then ?
They somehow managedMET to persuadeNONMET the owners , apparently it was and it was and nobody else had ever been allowedNONMET in this place not even erm historians who writeNONMET about famous buildings , even they had been refusedNONMET access !
Where is it ?
Somewhere in Oxfordshire .
Oh !
They don't knowNONMET where ?
Oh .
So this was about last week's episode ?
I thinkNONMET it was about last week's epi , but they seemNONMET to e implyNONMET that it was last week's episode that would Oh .
do it .
We seemNONMET to have gotNONMET one spare video if we don't getNONMET it watchedNONMET before Wednesday .
Alright .
Well that's the only chance .
Oh yeah cos we're goingNONMET to Maryland tomorrow .
your dad .
Mm .
Erm not it wasn't about your dad , it was about my birthday cos Cos yo he'd realizedNONMET that it was my birthday , and wha , what did I wantNONMET ?
So I saidNONMET sendNONMET me a cheque and I'll goNONMET and shopNONMET .
And ?
And last week cos she's quite generous isn't she ?
She is a bit but it's .
No , I didn't sayNONMET anything .
I thinkNONMET that's the thing .
So your dad sent a cheque .
laugh Anyway I askedNONMET her if she'd heardNONMET from your dad , and she has heardNONMET from your dad apparently on Friday he wentNONMET to the consultant Mm .
and next week he's gotMET his first well she didn't knowNONMET whether it was radiotherapy or chemotherapy .
And she saidNONMET he has to goNONMET trottingMET to Exeter two or three times a week now .
Mm .
I don't knowNONMET how long it's goingNONMET to goMET on for , or what it is exactly but I thoughtNONMET it would be a good idea to ring your dad up and seeMET .
Mm .
But at least things have movedMET , and at least they've goneNONMET round .
So I'm pleased really , are you ?
Interesting that they've done it so quickly isn't it ?
After seeingNONMET him , because he thoughtNONMET that once he'd seenNONMET the consultant it would then takeMET some time to getNONMET the treatment startedNONMET , but they must have gotMET themselves over that .
Yeah .
Well I meanNONMET everyone .
Yeah .
I thinkNONMET .
GotNONMET ta getMET moving .
And presumably whatever it was the GP had giveNONMET him has had tha , upsetMET that thrombosis again .
I don't knowNONMET whether to ringNONMET him tonight , oh it's too late tonight now .
It's much too late .
Perhaps we could ringNONMET tomorrow afternoon when the children are up ?
Well they loveNONMET talkingNONMET to them on the phone don't they ?
I knowNONMET they do .
We could can prime them up on what to sayNONMET and types of things to talkNONMET about so they don't getNONMET moanedNONMET down or something !
BoggedMET down !
So he's had to goNONMET in , what did you sayNONMET ?
Three times a week ?
I don't knowNONMET she just saidNONMET Something like that a few times a week and I thinkNONMET it soundedNONMET like three cos she was wonderingNONMET how he would copeNONMET with driving and everything .
Mm a trial !
Well I hopeNONMET not I meanNONMET no he won't be able to driveNONMET but presumably your mum can do that for , they've gotMET hundreds of people there , he's always drivingNONMET people everywhere That's right .
so I don't seeMET why they can't driveNONMET him !
I'm sure they will Yes .
cos they're very good aren't they ?
I meanNONMET look at that woman doing her er from the from the church .
At times like this it would be nice if we livedNONMET nearer could help     out          .
It would nice if we livedNONMET there but we can't so It's about .
And writeNONMET as well .
Yes .
Double dose .
Yes .
And pulledNONMET out .
Well it's sort of pulled out , but at least it's .
We'll be paying for it as well .
And it's hard as well .
We've been paying anyway , so it must of you knowNONMET .
What does erm you seeMET er Eileen's and she's having chemotherapy isn't she ?
By me , by medication , is that right ?
Well she takesNONMET all these tablet things .
That's right she has a sort of massive dose every now and then .
And that makesMET her feel what ?
She's not in pain is she ?
More sort of dopey .
I wouldn't careNONMET if they madeMET me dazed Yeah .
!
Yeah .
I du n noNONMET .
Not gonNONMET na Difficult to knowNONMET .
Oh yes , that was it !
I wonderNONMET how bad it is , that feeling's like , we don't really knowNONMET how bad it is do we ?
No .
Perhaps he will be able to sayNONMET , you knowNONMET ?
But whether he'd tellNONMET us over the telephone , you thinkNONMET askNONMET .
I thinkNONMET he would wouldn't he ?
I thinkNONMET so .
Cos we've gotMET the AGM in two weeks time Mm .
and we votedNONMET all these people that are here What type of this ?
Well you just It doesn't matterNONMET .
you just come along don't yo you find out what we do with all the money , and you find out who's doing what , and who's doing you knowNONMET ?
Mm .
It's it's quite exciting really !
If you !
But I've laugh These little things You couldn't showNONMET me something Alright you seeMET , cos it's We're confusingNONMET her now cos This is where we're goingNONMET not Towcester alright ?
This page ?
This , yes we're taking over a couple of When , when's that then ?
places in Leicestershire .
When is it ?
And we're goingNONMET on a coach so you don't you have to worryMET no .
Oh !
And it'll be really rather dolly , we'll have a little holiday you seeMET together and we sort of goNONMET teachingNONMET together and How long is it for ?
It'll on a Friday afternoon , Friday night Yeah .
you knowNONMET , five ,  half five-ish .
And what do you do ?
And come back on a Sunday And afternoon .
you've been before ?
Well we've never been this place before , but we've been on a similar do .
And what do you do then ?
Well , we have Yeah .
all sorts of things organised Yeah , and pullMET out some special people are comingNONMET to do some Christian teaching for us , you knowNONMET somebody from the Yeah .
And then there's gonNONMET na be silly things like walks , you knowNONMET and Lots of play !
Oh yeah .
and lots of laugh and lots of fun activities so they go and they do little trips out And have they got you knowNONMET , to the localities , you knowNONMET ?
And you getMET to knowNONMET people , that basically Oh yes , yes !
it , and you can relaxMET in these Is it amazing little sitting rooms !
I can ha , you knowNONMET I don't knowNONMET , if I goNONMET over there now to and I saidNONMET please showNONMET me  this no , I'm not !
You seeNONMET everything I won't goNONMET , especially now since he's retired !
He doesn't wanNONMET na knowNONMET !
I won't goNONMET anywhere with , I don't wantNONMET to goNONMET without him !
Well you tellNONMET him !
I can't We wantNONMET him here , we don't wa , we don't wantNONMET Yes .
just you .
Unless I feelMET terrible about it !
laugh We can offerNONMET you , you knowNONMET , a nice  twin room !
Twin room .
I thoughtNONMET it was lovely of him !
A twin room !
laugh laugh seat belt , oh it doesn't tellMET you  on  that one waitNONMET a minute bargain break lookNONMET at the price !
LookNONMET at the price !
Ah , pension .
That would be it , wouldn't it ?
Retired Yes , forty pound a go , seeNONMET !
That's only about sixty Ah !
pound for a whole weekend in beds , breakfasts Is it really !
evening meal How much ?
the lot .
In that beautiful And it's a very beautiful place .
beautiful house .
And you'll getNONMET a separate room Is it ?
to yourselves .
Do you  have a separate room ?
Yeah Yeah , oh yeah .
Mm .
Really ?
All in to oh comeMET on , get yourself organised  book yourself  in and laugh Yeah laugh Cos I cos I had You if I don't I !
We are bossy is the word !
laugh No good for me !
I really thinkNONMET she's good for , but ooh I getNONMET out of breath but Well you tellNONMET by the lakeside you knowNONMET , it's like a big Oh right !
and then she's !
I knowNONMET !
I thinkNONMET she's gotNONMET to knowNONMET well enough that We've only gotNONMET little .
Yeah .
I knowNONMET .
Yeah .
Mm .
Since , I meanNONMET when it was on the back I thoughtNONMET oh I don't knowNONMET how you getNONMET used to each since he tookMET the evening out and then he's different bloke Yeah .
I saidNONMET to you you knowNONMET Yeah .
and I saidNONMET , he saidNONMET no you're not being but sometimes I feelMET as though I am , you knowNONMET , it's the change !
No , you can't tellNONMET I wouldn't knowNONMET , unless you saidNONMET .
I sitNONMET down to the table , and watchNONMET me , real men aren't like that are they ?
and it locksMET Yeah .
and some sit in , you knowNONMET , it's locked .
Yes , yes .
So I goNONMET , have job to find it he just looksNONMET at me hard as nails .
laugh Well he's not a party-goer really No , it's only cos he doesn't He's not .
understandNONMET it .
He's er he could do without this then !
I supposeNONMET a little Greek mythology did fitMET in really , laugh lived with you as long you've livedNONMET with him really !
Yes !
Here we are two role forms .
I'll leaveNONMET you to it Oh just do you have to tellNONMET Gerald that Do you thinkNONMET I'll be able to fillMET these in ?
Hello Dot !
Hello !
We're here again !
What's that ?
It's alright don't worryMET about it .
I sayNONMET what have you gotNONMET on your She's tapingNONMET it all , she holdsMET it against you , you seeMET , so she's tryingNONMET to blackmailNONMET !
Oh !
laugh It's all to do with language in the nineteen nineties Jean .
Oh !
And this man cameNONMET to the door , and he wentNONMET to getNONMET the hold belt , that should just have a tape recorder on conversation just throughout the week so it's gettingMET all sorts of rubbish goingNONMET in there , laugh and it's all do with erm you knowNONMET people and the erm wives and language of the nineties .
GoNONMET and getNONMET a drink !
I shall moveNONMET , yes dear .
So I getNONMET a free twenty five pound worth of Marks and Spencers erm gift vouchers which .
what twenty ?
Yeah .
Have to cutMET costs .
Bribery and corruption !
laugh I hearNONMET you've gotNONMET two twentieth century !
I'll do anything for money and chocolate !
laugh I hearNONMET you've gotNONMET two twentieth century Oh right yeah well I was so wornMET out What have you got ?
that the pages are always sticky with sellotape and so on .
Actually it must be quite interesting lookingMET at the  development of language as time goesMET on .
Mm well that , that's all , that's for ?
It'll be interesting in the year two thousand and ninety to lookNONMET back and seeMET what we used to do in the nineteen nineties .
I should thinkNONMET I'll be dead just then !
I don't thinkNONMET I'll be around then Well you won't somehow !
be around but it'll be fascinating cos you'll be recordedNONMET for life June !
That's it !
And I'll laugh Sorry I'm goingNONMET to speakNONMET to Dot , I was just goingNONMET to speakNONMET to Dot and I'm Oh !
I shouldn't talkNONMET to her if I were you .
No !
SayNONMET something sensible .
Yes love I am goingNONMET to sayNONMET something sensible !
laugh comeNONMET to tellNONMET you Alright .
how many little do you have ?
It variesNONMET considerably you can have eight you can up to fourteen except fifteen why , how many do you wantNONMET  in ?
No , it's alright cos someone's rung up from home , sayNONMET be in eight o'clock , so she wantsNONMET to do something .
Right .
She saidNONMET ooh , you knowNONMET can I inviteNONMET a couple of friends , can I inviteNONMET sort of you knowNONMET , people back to lunch but when it's sort of the list I meanNONMET , cos I I'm not InviteNONMET .
Well I've gotNONMET to knowNONMET , cos sort of adult as well , I meanNONMET you included as I meanNONMET it's to put GettingNONMET a bit long ?
Yes !
I'd inviteNONMET them Yes , I meanNONMET it's her sort of age .
old !
of having it !
Well  that's you knowNONMET what I meanNONMET , it's got the .
It's more cosy !
And at home .
If she wantsNONMET her sister , No , yeah but on the day no , on the day When is it ?
Can we goNONMET ?
Erm I knowNONMET that , but will you makeMET it stickMET .
Yes , oh well .
Can you be a path finder leader on the Sunday because No , !
No , you knowNONMET what I meanNONMET ?
But , if you can you knowNONMET agreeNONMET to tellNONMET him And the But I'll findNONMET them , and you won't have any bother .
Oh I knowNONMET , but I meanNONMET sort of there , I don't knowNONMET she would actually when it comesMET to it , but if we seeNONMET her up there cos we can do the music playing in background It's nice to seeNONMET erm Michael and Sophie Yeah .
Actually it's quite a cosy group , so they probably knowNONMET each other by yeah .
now then .
yeah .
laugh LooksNONMET a bit agitated !
But anyway that's somebody that would would be a few Telling everyone about her mum and dad when they and erm how she talkedNONMET to her mum about that , and it helpedMET her .
But her mum I meanNONMET I knowNONMET cos I meanNONMET , I knowNONMET her mum .
She Well vaguely , but Are they movingNONMET to to be with someone else or I don't knowNONMET , I meanNONMET I don't But perhaps he doesn't wantNONMET to change till cos she'll Yeah but she so whether they thinkNONMET , well so it's after six months , Well I du n noNONMET .
Is that alright ?
They were , they were really nice .
I hateNONMET being sick and one thing another well , it turnedMET out Yeah you do .
Yeah .
Sophie was supposed to be doing the chorus so I grabbedNONMET Mary , and saidNONMET comeNONMET with me on the half way through , calledNONMET Sophie why are you doing all the talking Dot and not Mary !
Cos she Cos she's supposed to be Andy !
Oh !
laugh So , Sarah had a job to do , but it wasn't , sort of , till the end , and we're gonNONMET na finishNONMET too quickly because normally we have it like Paul and Helen being really with it and lookNONMET there's sort of upward Oh no !
and then down below there's Helen you knowNONMET Christopher and Yeah then Laura's with him .
But none of them turned up to today so Actually can you really face the from the other pathfinders Mm cos she'll seeNONMET you there .
Cos we're having , not problems , but at school it really it's unfortunate because she was putMET in a third year , and she's only a third year now and she was on a third year class last year .
Who else is there with her in there ?
They're all Well we've actually choseNONMET the brownies now her age .
Yeah .
Yeah .
But it really hitMET her this year , we feltMET quite disgruntled Yeah .
that I really but I meanNONMET last year still not finished !
laugh She's really funny !
So we had a laugh ov , well saidNONMET he when he woke up , he saidNONMET day one you can do three on one day !
laugh MindNONMET you , she's like that , better get When you're feelingMET keen I saidNONMET , you can do a lot and then They're rather weed , I knowNONMET my two even .
erm rather than I supposeNONMET cos he's done that at school Yeah , that's right !
they comeNONMET home they've gotNONMET ta snuggleNONMET up in bed with a book Yeah .
you knowNONMET , or Patrick's into psalms , she lovesNONMET poetry psalms , I thoughtNONMET !
Why not !
I used to do it , oh what psalm is it she ?
I've forgottenNONMET , about being  in  mud was it a ?
Ri , she did it .
Yeah .
But as they do , it's gonNONMET na hitMET her cos it's not year that it doesn't helpMET , seeNONMET if she's in a third year class , she was always as she is now , in the top of that , but even That's right .
when she was only a second year therefore that meansMET , she's not givenMET enough work , but I meanNONMET I knowNONMET what you meanNONMET .
She's sort of got with children then because this erm testing , they've gotNONMET to a school work outside curriculum .
they've go , that's it , the they do have to takeMET them on to ta the next I meanNONMET Yeah well she's sort of with the third year and will admitMET she's so fed up !
laugh But I , I'm Oh yeah .
there's a lot of !
I meanNONMET I'm glad she's er September , and an August birthday , I would of hatedNONMET to have goneNONMET Well I'm glad of that my children cos all Yeah .
mine are like that , and it does meanMET that they can relaxMET you knowNONMET about work and everything Yeah .
cos you knowNONMET they're a million times ahead .
They've gotNONMET an extra .
Yeah haven't gotNONMET to worryMET .
all of them so when her class cameMET up , cos she'd been with the class right from nursery and when she putMET into this you knowNONMET , with the double third year , cos they goNONMET upstairs for third and fourth year and they really do classes below she didn't knowNONMET anything  in the class !
No !
I meanNONMET er she , they weren't No I supposeNONMET er it's a bit hard on th , the  kid , sort of , work wise , expectingNONMET her to be her to be er ahead , but not But friends meansMET such a lot don't they , at that age ?
Yeah .
They see .
Oh right yeah .
We've got , we've still not got it yet !
Oh , you've got the !
Well we had , we had it two weeks ago Yes , and they were away too .
They were away .
, gonNONMET na be away another two weeks by the sound of it .
But when she getsNONMET  back Yeah .
I don't knowNONMET , I must talkNONMET to Marilyn about it .
Shame really .
There again it's if we give Oh , oh are you ?
we'll give Oh !
we're giving it to her .
Ooh !
She's got the , she won't .
Oh yes , I don't feelNONMET she's despisedNONMET in any way .
I shoutedNONMET breakfast is ready and then I startedNONMET my breakfast , cos you had goneNONMET upstairs weren't you ?
I don't thinkNONMET we've gotNONMET any this morning Are you goingNONMET to work ?
Yeah , he's goingNONMET to workNONMET How did it getNONMET really big mummy ?
How's Tim , cos he doesn't sitNONMET down properly He's , finished .
Have you seenNONMET the butter Tim ?
Is he a fidget He's kneelingNONMET up Is that enough milk Christopher it's very good It's just that I'm savingMET .
PutNONMET it more milk over the , that , what about that bit there dad .
Er mum it doesn't matterNONMET where everything's gotMET milk on does it ?
It doesn't matterNONMET what ?
Where everything's gotMET milk Here's one when everything's gotMET milk on it No , I wouldn't eatNONMET half of an apple here's one Will you sitNONMET down on your bottom oh no Yeah cos I don't I thinkNONMET I'm lookingMET forward to a normal day honey Yeah , would be when I'm away .
This is A bit proud of it you knowNONMET laugh Bit of a seemsNONMET to be wide awake could of got up What , was I weren't very good I'm afraid What day is it ?
What do you thinkNONMET ?
It's It was Tuesday yesterday .
What day is it today ?
There's Monday , Tuesday Wednesday Wednesday well done Yes , on a Wednesday , this is the day when mummy goesNONMET teachingNONMET at school in the afternoon I did Christopher's school Mm , mm .
and do you still have story time story time I thinkNONMET , Mrs still there and that Mrs did he tellNONMET you Yes he did , with Imogen Alright , laugh it's old age you knowNONMET , Erm , you didn't tellNONMET me anything about what saidNONMET wantsNONMET a whole don't are they ?
Who wantsNONMET a whole ?
wantNONMET to swapNONMET it over A whole ?
Erm Certainly not a whole that one Do you wantNONMET a whole ?
Yeah , I wantNONMET a whole with that whole Erm apparently You can't have a toast cos I'm gonNONMET na have a one You have a half of it so the whole of it .
I wantedNONMET a whole one Oh no you don't I wantedNONMET a whole I don't likeNONMET wholes You'll getNONMET it'll be half a whole laugh , getNONMET me a bit confusedNONMET here Erm especially I did seeNONMET it on the Mum Mum , can I have a whole piece of toast please ?
No , Is Tim having it ?
It's Oh dear Mum I just wonderedNONMET I forgotNONMET to Oh dear I spokeNONMET to that was Monday night , yeah , she's been head of department , did I tellNONMET you that ?
You didn't sayNONMET anything about that Oh right , I thoughtNONMET I toldNONMET you then .
No , Oh , well she rang up , I've seenNONMET Christopher in the catalogue actually and they and could askNONMET if publications can the one that we seeNONMET We've seenNONMET the book yeah , ah , ah , she's seenNONMET the catalogue , ah she's gotNONMET , on the , yeah I seeMET he's in the catalogue oh yeah laugh I thoughtNONMET it was goingNONMET to be a magazine ?
Oh , oh no , you're gettingNONMET confused , you knowNONMET the book that is out , that is on Yes , yes beginning careers , well it is in a catalogue , the book is in a catalogue , yeah , so there's a front cover of the book sittingMET in the catalogue smilingMET at her , sayingMET please buyNONMET this book of Christopher .
Oh I seeMET , so he's even more liked Yeah laugh We don't wantNONMET to buyNONMET it , we just wantNONMET the catalogue laugh I seeMET , oh So she's orderedNONMET it because laugh laugh laugh she's startedNONMET Liam , they're having a pre-packed school at Durham choir boys , whatever it is , cos he's from school , apparently the locality of demandingNONMET six year olds and under so they and another la labouring school Oh Oh Tim PutNONMET it on there , oh it's too late to putNONMET it on there , oh that's alright do it likeNONMET that I can't You can useNONMET your cloth daddy Mum Yeah you haven't , mum , doesn't knowNONMET No You do it What are you You do it Do what ?
Mm What do you wantNONMET me to do ?
That do Just leaveNONMET that on the plate like that , that's fine Why ?
Er It's when we're goingNONMET to takeNONMET it in the kitchen and putNONMET it away when we've finishedNONMET .
Anyway I've had enough Right , just , she saidNONMET she's goingNONMET to be head of department , it startsNONMET at ten OK , so she'll be ahead of herself , then as she'll be responsible for gettingMET staff saidNONMET she still hasn't , gotMET she saidNONMET , little love I didn't wantNONMET a , a whole Timothy wantedNONMET the whole dear They've both gotNONMET whole Oh that's clever That's it laugh They they both had half a whole , I thoughtNONMET that's what you saidNONMET half a whole laugh Oh dear , yeah that was my fault , sorry now if you have my plate then you won't have any trouble with that erm , what Erm , I'll eatNONMET the half TeachNONMET us what age are they ?
Erm , erm What age will she teachNONMET then ?
seven , eight year old boys at the moment , and she will teachNONMET children under That's enough she , which is what she did at well she had the five to six readNONMET I guessNONMET she really likedNONMET those , she only got movedMET because of er the Yeah spreadNONMET it I am Hurry up cos he wantsNONMET the margarine , can he have the margarine while you're spreadingNONMET on ?
I thinkNONMET you've gotNONMET enough there haven't you ?
Mum Mm I've had the Did you ?
laugh Yeah I had it goMET over there When we've had half a whole , I'm thinkingNONMET half a whole we have gotNONMET half a whole No they've gotNONMET half a whole Oh , they've also gotNONMET half a Yeah I thoughtNONMET I was makingMET the best of both answers You were dear , very clever I can do it , how can you tellNONMET the difference ?
Well there's two different wholes aren't there ?
chop toast you can chopNONMET either that way or that way The one with you chopNONMET the chop and then there will be squares That's right , there will be four then , four bits , life is so complicated .
Mum , but it's tricky because when , when you chopNONMET that way , and then that way chop it that way it's all Mum and Ours do actually Empty now Tim ?
What would you likeNONMET now Tim on there ?
SeemedNONMET to have gotNONMET rather a lot of margarine on there , hopeNONMET you're goingNONMET to eatNONMET all your toast today , not like yesterday Erm margarine the margarine yeah you've gotNONMET margarine what else would you likeNONMET ?
Marmite Mum , my fingers are Rice Krispie in where ?
In my tea , oh yes there is laugh , soggy , it's out how did it getNONMET there ?
I don't knowNONMET ploppedNONMET in laugh , toast in my Probably dropped in when we were shakingNONMET them in the bowl , Rice Krispies seemedNONMET to getMET everywhere , undoNONMET the thing and there's Rice Krispies everywhere , And there not only good It's a hoover day today Tim Why ?
We haven't clean for ages It's hoover day so we'll have a go at it today And where I gonNONMET na goNONMET ?
You're gonNONMET na helpNONMET me , you're gonNONMET na stayNONMET here I'm afraid laugh Why ?
Me and you doing the cleaning in the morning now granddad's off What I , where I gonNONMET na goNONMET ?
You're not goingNONMET anywhere , you're stayingNONMET here Can I helpNONMET you plantNONMET the ?
Bulbs , er probably not cos I thinkNONMET I'll have to do while you're at school cos daddy tellsNONMET me it's gonNONMET na rainNONMET this afternoon , I'll have to do that this morning , pity that .
Why can't we do them tomorrow ?
Because it saidNONMET on the packet you'll plantNONMET them immediately after buyingNONMET and we don't knowNONMET when Aunty Gwen boughtNONMET them and it might rainNONMET tomorrow as well , I thinkNONMET I ought to putNONMET them in while it's fine , now In in the ground , I'll saveMET you a couple if you likeNONMET , you can plantNONMET two by yourself .
I'm not a plant that you must of boughtNONMET them yesterday .
Mm .
I'm You wantNONMET to plantNONMET them , you can helpNONMET me plantNONMET them cos you'll be around Can I have It seemsNONMET pity to goNONMET to school and not plant bulbs And daddy goingNONMET to goNONMET work Yeah , there be me and you plantingNONMET bulbs and cleaningNONMET the house this morning That's a lot Yeah it's a jobs morning this morning kitchen floors a good thing , we'll have to kitchen floor Tim , that'll be fun won't it ?
With Christopher No he'll be at school , just me and you , scrubbingNONMET away at the floor you'd rather do it with Christopher wouldn't you ?
laugh Sorry about that .
Tim helpNONMET us do the garden Mm , well he won't because you'll be at school laugh laugh you'll have to waitNONMET till the holidays and then Christopher can join in and It Saturday's Mm Where holiday Where is I have , where we have to goNONMET to When you what what , sayNONMET that all again Because , mum how long are we stayingNONMET at Jo's ?
Oh that's ages away you knowNONMET , it's not till May , you can goNONMET two nights at Jo's Two nights about and what day do we goNONMET ?
GoNONMET on Saturday Saturday , so we goNONMET home No goNONMET home stayNONMET Saturday night and Sunday night and we go back on Monday yeah but we won't be goingNONMET home , we'll be goingNONMET to York Straight after Mm , mm Why ?
Cos we it's a long , long way to Jo's and just to goNONMET , right all that way for two nights would not really be worth it .
Tim erm lickedNONMET your knife , right can we erm have a I've gotNONMET to goNONMET in a minute .
sneeze I'll just have that I wishNONMET to chooseNONMET sneeze Oh dear Erm , A wise man built his house upon the rock , a wise man built his house upon the rock , the wise man built his house upon the rock and the rain cameMET tumblingNONMET down , and the rain cameNONMET down and the flood cameNONMET up and the rain cameNONMET down and the flood cameNONMET up A wise man built his house upon the rock , a wise man built his house upon the rock , the wise man built his house upon the rock and the rain cameMET tumblingNONMET down , and the rain cameNONMET down and the flood cameNONMET up and the rain cameNONMET down and the flood cameNONMET up I dropNONMET it the rain cameNONMET down and the floods cameNONMET up and the house on the rocks slidNONMET down , but the foolish man built his house upon the sand , the foolish man built his house upon the sand , the foolish man built his house upon the sand and the rain cameMET tumblingNONMET down the rain cameNONMET down and the floods cameNONMET up and the house on the rocks slidNONMET down , but the foolish man built his house upon the sand , the foolish man built his house upon the sand , the foolish man built his house upon the sand and the rain cameMET tumblingNONMET down splish , splash and the rain cameNONMET down and floods cameNONMET up , the rain cameNONMET down and the floods cameNONMET up , the rain cameNONMET down and the floods cameNONMET up and the house on his band fellNONMET flat and the rain cameNONMET down and floods cameNONMET up , the rain cameNONMET down and the floods cameNONMET up , the rain cameNONMET down and the floods cameNONMET up and the house on his band fellNONMET flat That's the flat bit Mm Mum I'll be laugh Are you ready ?
Lord Jesus , thankNONMET you for a nice sleep , thankNONMET you for another day , please helpNONMET us to do the kind of things that you wantNONMET us to do , prayer for Christopher to behaveNONMET at school , helpNONMET him to do his best and for daddy at work , for Tim and I as we stayNONMET at home , helpNONMET us to knowNONMET the kind of things we do and this afternoon when grandma comesNONMET we'll spareMET the time for her as well , Amen .
Amen I thinkNONMET he's , I readNONMET and the rain do Rightie oh oh .
Can you wipeNONMET your hands please cos you'll getNONMET sticky all over the piano Mum I've wipedNONMET Do it again Do it more do it lot's and lot's cos I've noticedNONMET it's very sticky on here , that you should wipeNONMET it cos it Why ?
Cos it , if you putNONMET sticky fingers on , you won't meanNONMET to , it'll just won't How did you knowNONMET before you touchNONMET the piano ?
Because I feltNONMET them last night and feltNONMET ooh this sticky anyway played keys on piano oops laugh You be home normal time or even earlier playing piano later laugh I was , estimate normal time Mum Ok which hand do I have to do it with ?
half side each or mum What ?
Mummy well I thinkNONMET half five , but then sometimes quarter to Yeah I knowNONMET Mum I supposeNONMET I ought to thinkNONMET quarter to six mummy so I have this pleasant surprise when I I stayNONMET in the car cos er I don't wantNONMET to walkNONMET , too cold You don't wantNONMET to walkNONMET where ?
To school it's Well we have to walkNONMET to school love in the car , In the car let's do a gap Christopher One , two , three , four That's very good Bye Tim One , two , three , four , five , six , seven , eight laugh Bye , bye everybody Bye , bye everybody Bye , bye everybody , well daddy bye , bye daddy laugh I don't knowNONMET what I'm sayingNONMET One , two , three , four , one , two , three , four , one , two , three , four , one , two , three , four , one , two , three , four , one , two , three , four it Tim will you eat it up please ?
You it one , two , three , four you don't wantNONMET it all , that your trouble ?
I don't wantNONMET them all up there Why not ?
LetNONMET me chopNONMET you that much , you eat up that Did you hearNONMET what I saidNONMET mummy ?
Mm , oh very good aren't you ?
Did that one then Can do you it , can you ?
Can you do that one ?
Oh you've gotNONMET to do some writing first .
I don't wantNONMET to again , Oh comeMET on Christopher comeNONMET and sometimes it in the right panel , that's the right panel there and then it goesMET in the left hand and then it goesMET to the right hand and then it goesMET to the left then right , the left , the right , left , right , left , confusing , but it's that hand to startNONMET with and goNONMET like this playing piano one , two , three , four it goesMET one , two , three , four they goMET playing piano one , two , three , four hangNONMET about , you seeNONMET what it saysNONMET here oh you don't playNONMET that one , just the something for you to writeNONMET underneath , I thoughtNONMET it was complicated Did , did , that's all something to do with writingNONMET that one need to readNONMET a song ?
I don't needNONMET to , no , you just have to writeNONMET it Is it this one mummy ?
Yep My getNONMET a ComeMET on Tim please move Oh , oh or else we're goingNONMET to be late are we doing the bulbs now ?
aren't we , yeah it's goingNONMET to rainNONMET as well , lookNONMET at that , we're gonNONMET na have to putNONMET our coats , our rain coats on Oh it's rainingNONMET in time for us to goNONMET to school , comeMET on Oh Tim comeMET on , aagh He boughtNONMET himself er a padded shirt , you knowNONMET ?
A padded shirt like Alfred had for Christmas ?
Mum Robert had for Christmas .
He had one for Christmas did he ?
Well I , I , I askedNONMET him what he wantedNONMET for Christmas Yeah ?
and he saidNONMET getNONMET me a padded shirt , he saidNONMET , Joycie's gettingNONMET me one he saidNONMET and I wantNONMET two .
Oh .
So that's what I boughtNONMET him .
And I was lookingNONMET in the yesterday and they sellNONMET them in You Can't GoMET Wrong for five ninety nine for Robert .
Mm .
Ten ninety nine he paidNONMET for his .
It's a nice , nice thick one though .
Yeah .
Mind I sawNONMET them in tt they were the same price in erm You Can't GoMET Wrong and tt the place opposite Woolworths in Caerphilly Yeah .
Campaign on a what do you callNONMET it and erm and funny enough I was readingNONMET the Campaign yesterday and I was lookingNONMET at the er thing and they've gotMET a sale on haven't they ?
Yeah .
Anyway , erm we wentNONMET to the Ca Polly hadn't seenNONMET them in the shops anywhere and wentNONMET to Caerphilly market on Saturday morning and as we were comingNONMET from it he saidNONMET lookNONMET there's a shirt you wantNONMET for Robert there .
So I thoughtNONMET well in case I can't getNONMET them anywhere else the market and he saidNONMET well we'll have one from here , twelve ninety nine .
We goesNONMET up town the following week then to get and I forgetNONMET what I was lookingNONMET for , oh it was I was lookingNONMET for your blouse Yeah .
and erm they had this one down in the shop next to er Aye and erm they had them in the window there twelve ninety nine .
Mm .
And I wentNONMET down , I wentNONMET somewhere else there was a few places I sawNONMET them so erm I saidNONMET to , I saidNONMET to Robert now you knowNONMET those shirts , that shirt I boughtNONMET you for Christmas ?
And he saidNONMET yeah I saidNONMET I could've gotNONMET two for the price of one .
see that then .
Padded leisure shirts five ninety nine and I read the bloody thing out yesterday .
No wonder Nan can you seeNONMET them Yes love .
They've dug up Yes they I can't get up now mummy .
I can't Oh you knowNONMET padded shirts for padded shirts nine ninety nine to twelve ninety nine .
Cos Ken saidNONMET , first of all he couldn't findNONMET any and he saidNONMET oh he saidNONMET perhaps I should've boughtNONMET them when I sawNONMET them , nine ninety nine .
But anyway he sawNONMET this one stall and he had a look and they had three racks of them for ten ninety nine and then we foundNONMET some others then , they were they were ten ninety nine but they were as thick as these other ones .
They were twelve ninety nine .
But erm the shop opposite er you knowNONMET there's the market and there's a cake shop , opposite there by the shop , they've gotMET a sale there .
Stock clearance .
By , by the , you knowNONMET wallpaper Yeah Mm .
and then there's a shop next to it and he's sellingNONMET er stock clearance sales there and that's where he sawNONMET them , the padded shirts , there .
Mm But I didn't lookNONMET , I didn't stopNONMET , it was rainingNONMET so bad Thursday morning and windy that I I wentNONMET to the market , I cutMET straight through and wentNONMET up and Di wentNONMET to getNONMET the paper then he wentNONMET .
So we , we were back in here by half past eleven Thursday I didn't wantNONMET to stayNONMET out in the cold .
Mm .
Yeah Yippee !
I wanNONMET na getNONMET him another towelling dressing gown because the blue one he had on the caravan he broughtNONMET home for the winter bringNONMET them home and washNONMET them .
But he would he saidNONMET don't washNONMET it I wanNONMET na wearNONMET it .
So really he could do with one for down there and one for home .
But the Yeah .
only other one he's gotNONMET is a silk one so er I was gonNONMET na goNONMET on Tuesday and have a look and they had them there before Christmas , seven ninety nine and , but it saidMET one size now I don't knowNONMET whether the one size will fitNONMET Di because the last one I had for him I sentNONMET away for and I had erm so I don't knowNONMET whether them down there would fitNONMET , they were seven ninety nine , there were white and lemon and pale green that was striped I thinkNONMET .
They had some nice thick ones in Peacocks but they were seventeen pound well sixteen ninety five and they didn't reduceMET them for the sale .
Mm .
He wouldn't letNONMET me payNONMET that for it , he saidNONMET that they had at the shop .
And when we wentNONMET then after Christmas the shop was closed down for the There we are !
the Christmas holidays .
I'll have that one .
You don't mindNONMET Alison takingNONMET you home ?
No , I don't mindNONMET .
No , you've gotNONMET ta giveNONMET it me back , I'm gonNONMET na .
Oh .
Hope she looksNONMET after you .
Perhaps she'll helpNONMET come in with you .
Yes .
She's stupid !
She !
She's goingNONMET now and gonNONMET na leaveNONMET me this old crap on the table !
.
What ?
Yeah .
No , I haven't .
I've , no I'm gonNONMET na giveNONMET this to .
If it was me .
.
.
And !
Are you comingNONMET with me , yeah !
But at least when this bloke comesNONMET tonight you've gotNONMET something for him .
Especially what he's .
You haven't been out .
Well I ain't had a on the same rate as me !
blue they should have the same , like mine !
Wouldn't you ?
And then Kimmy can comeNONMET and visitNONMET and playNONMET in the garden !
That would be nice wouldn't it ?
and goNONMET to bankNONMET and seeMET what it would costNONMET you for .
It's Yeah .
Well yo , you borrowNONMET your money on the house till your mor , >till it comes through .
Uncle Keith did that .
Well do you thinkNONMET it's a lot ?
Well I don't , he saidNONMET It dependsNONMET on , on the houses .
Well you've gotMET an appoint , you're gotNONMET ta goNONMET , have an appointment to goNONMET and seeNONMET somebody there aren't you ?
And then in the first place you're gettingNONMET enough money you can you can bashMET it away and that'll payMET for your furniture .
Yeah .
You can have down the road for the .
Oh , cos it'll dependNONMET on his er And down at the road there .
Mm .
Yes , and your .
You could pawnNONMET those .
You're not !
It wouldn't matterNONMET what they saidNONMET .
Mhm , you could pawnNONMET those .
No .
them will come later when he gotNONMET there and then you can have something else nice .
Yeah .
TakeNONMET what you wantNONMET and leaveNONMET the rest , your mother'll getMET ridNONMET of it .
Kimmy would likeNONMET to come over and visit wouldn't you ?
You'd have to makeMET room in the back garden !
He never phonedNONMET me !
.
Going there ?
Yeah .
But But it might be .
But what do you thinkNONMET ?
I thinkNONMET it's half the point !
I knowNONMET .
SaidNONMET saidNONMET he come from the that and all .
Yeah .
But you don't needNONMET it in the car .
Yeah but , I meanNONMET yo , people are allowedNONMET now to putNONMET their own in aren't they ?
But you'd have to have the points fittedNONMET by them but you getNONMET your own Yeah .
And just getMET the tested like me and your dad did .
Mm .
He did two rooms .
I wantNONMET that as well .
You're not having that !
No , I tellNONMET you what I'd likeNONMET you knowNONMET the ones ?
Well what does it costNONMET to getNONMET a little what's a name now ?
You just never been round to lookNONMET .
You goNONMET round in the sales , have a look .
Mm .
You're not in a rush .
.
ListenNONMET , I would them for you then !
.
Mhm .
Oh I don't knowNONMET ma !
Mm .
I will .
Well I'll put , Kimmy must be there cos Kimmy's gonNONMET na be one our bridesmaids !
Ay !
Ay !
Ay !
What are you doing ?
What are you doing lady ?
Can Kimmy be one of our bridesmaids ?
Do you wanNONMET na be my bridesmaid ?
ComeMET on sweetheart !
ComeMET on !
Kimble .
ComeMET on sweetheart !
I thinkNONMET where anybod , ay !
ComeMET on !
Alison's here to take him out don't you ?
Ay ?
QQ Ay ?
The , all these light fittings , I don't wantNONMET to change them over .
We're not gonNONMET na winMET !
What you ?
It's me and .
Yes .
Hello sweetheart !
Why don't putNONMET it underneath .
Right , .
What number is it ?
Eighty one .
Well why ?
Oh it's bloody dangerous , very dangerous stuff !
Twenty five .
Well at least he can have a word with him about it and seeMET what and he can do , and then you goNONMET to and seeMET what they can do .
And , and , a number five down down .
GoNONMET and have a look , he proba probably for that price he might sayNONMET oh , we'll leaveNONMET the curtains and the carpets .
You've only gotNONMET to have them cleanedNONMET !
But the thing is erm with that , unless they're livingNONMET there they might nice .
It's only the ones that have nobody living Yeah .
in .
But we can't goNONMET in there .
It's like that one in Stanley Road .
Well ring her up and seeMET .
Should I ?
Not yet no , just getNONMET your out there and and then you might have a bit of lee-way might not we then ?
But how will I knowNONMET where to goNONMET ?
.
Well you just goNONMET to the front entrance Yeah .
and seeNONMET the porter .
And sayNONMET what type of ward ?
You wantNONMET to goNONMET to the orthopaedic .
And you goNONMET round the corner But she has to goNONMET to physio though .
No !
You knowNONMET where the porter's desk is ?
I knowNONMET where to goNONMET .
Yeah .
You goNONMET round that corner not off that way towards the wards just goNONMET from the desk right round the corner and followMET it right the way down as far as you can goNONMET .
You can't goNONMET many further cos there's a blank wall Right .
and you turnNONMET to your left .
Before you hitMET the blank wall you turnNONMET to your left .
And does nan walkNONMET or have a wheelchair ?
Have a wheelchair .
Cos it's a good way down .
And just goNONMET to reception cough and take and her card and then her folder comesMET out as you take it .
If you goNONMET now there'll be nobody there !
The fracture clinic she's goingNONMET to .
The factory ?
The fla Ay ?
The fracture clinic , not the bloody Fracture .
factory !
The orthopaedic .
The fra , fracture clinic !
Yes .
Okay .
Oh no , I'm alright .
We'll seeMET ah it's just down from here .
It's just .
They knowNONMET it's Doctor so You what ?
You have to somewhere .
But seeMET if I get out in .
won't they ?
No , it's not mine actually .
Do you , do you have to ?
Yes !
It's gotMET a garage and everything !
Ooh , it's soundsNONMET nice !
It'll costNONMET you for a garage round here !
When she moves the .
.
Get your coat on !
It will be granddad's garage .
Get your coat on love , ay ?
Yeah .
Yeah , I'm comingNONMET A man now !
A man triedNONMET to .
Double glazing !
!
And it's on the , on the Station Road .
Station Road .
There's a fence round the garden at the back !
.
GoNONMET and lookNONMET at the garden .
.
into the garage , I , I .
.
Oh !
Soon be .
Oh !
When she was you knowNONMET .
PutNONMET your arm in .
in the car .
Yeah but you'll be sittingNONMET in the chair won't you loveNONMET ?
Yep .
Are you tired of walkingNONMET ?
PutNONMET your arm in .
ComeMET on Kimmy !
Better have the .
Oh , hello !
You little smasher aren't you ?
Now you've gotNONMET ta get your coat on .
All the curtains and everything .
Are you comingNONMET then ?
.
Yeah ?
NeedNONMET anything else ?
Microwave , mincer ?
One or two ?
Lord helpNONMET me if it's from !
And don't forgetNONMET we're going down the fracture clinic Alison !
No .
She I hasn't forgottenNONMET that .
I .
Do you wantNONMET your chocolates ?
No .
Chocolates ?
.
Right , what do you thinkNONMET ?
Oh for me to go down there .
I'll be very nice !
Well you'll have to .
Why ?
Well !
I meanNONMET Ah , get a .
What you spendNONMET you could buyNONMET something .
Lots of .
Coming back here after tea .
Oh !
Invited to .
Ah , and you wantNONMET wantNONMET to getNONMET dad out of here ay ?
Bloody well !
Not a bloody cos I didn't hearNONMET him !
.
Oh .
Fifty one .
Going    down   Sainsbury's .
Anyway , you gotNONMET everything there , you gotNONMET your garage , you knowNONMET , you got double glazing .
You gotNONMET central heating !
Look out garage , we'll getNONMET one .
Yep .
A a .
Where is this ?
Yeah , I've gotNONMET one .
Kimmy !
ComeNONMET here !
That's it !
That's that erm Dartmoor Wildlife Park , that's Dartmoor or wherever it is !
When he was little he was satNONMET in his buggy Yeah .
his lunch .
And she gotNONMET ta showed down Fifteen bits and then from on top of a Now that's right !
building .
Yeah .
Right on top of him and it turnedNONMET round and smackedMET Oh !
him in the face and he's never likedNONMET them since .
No , leaveMET the sound !
You can listenNONMET to it without the sound .
Why , what you gotMET on ?
Ha !
This !
There's ashtray there .
Oh well aunty Julie's had a little boy then Sam ?
Yeah I knowNONMET .
Could .
No , you're not allowedNONMET to have it .
Yeah exactly eight pound .
Eight pound ?
That's quite big in n it ?
Not really .
Not seeingMET the size she was .
No !
And they saidNONMET it was gonNONMET na be a difficult birth and that cos Can you seeNONMET the spikes ?
baby isn't she ?
Yeah .
Just seeNONMET them can't you ?
didn't she ?
I thoughtNONMET she was really lucky though !
MindNONMET you don't bangNONMET your head .
Alright ?
Yeah not bad for trainers as well in't they ?
Yeah .
Normal Lee !
normal trainers but they just gotMET spikes in them .
Seventy , about seventy five pound a pair !
So he's gonNONMET na do it cash ?
Well the chap cameNONMET yesterday Watch !
when Ouch !
Exactly !
she was on her way into town seeMET Ahhh !
Well I don't knowNONMET which turnsMET out best And she cameNONMET out a you knowNONMET seeingNONMET who was goingNONMET in Ah ah ah ah ah !
They knowNONMET when .
and Phil wentMET round there yesterday afternoon .
Fifteen quid for this .
And she saidNONMET that she'd had the baby she was great .
How many am I losing ?
Yeah but , and she should of phonedNONMET , did she ?
She did !
Well yeah , we had a And if you wrapNONMET them round the Supposed to be goingNONMET down there this afternoon but Well should have won oi !
the shoe .
Yeah .
They had a bit of bad luck they reckonMET it was Oh , yes I knowNONMET .
He sat in seven minutes didn't he ?
We'll just dropMET the kids over Beryl's and er And leaveNONMET them , leave with them cough don't they ?
GotNONMET to just popMET into town .
Okay .
What's that ?
Oh Malcolm does likeNONMET turkey so we'll have turkey tomorrow .
Yeah , I couldn't getNONMET one down Co-op yesterday , they didn't have any .
Well they did Well chicken .
You could either have a ten or a twelve pound No , not that .
one You not gettingNONMET them and all ?
or you could have a What about you ?
I gotNONMET ta cookNONMET chicken for them .
Or you could have a No !
piddling little chicken No !
for about four pound You don't getNONMET nothing on them chickens ?
cos only had not ha , I thoughtNONMET no way !
At least I'll give you , who's gonNONMET na betMET right , who is at first place tomorrow , they're boundMET to be two , first of the day , so I thoughtNONMET well in town you can getMET about they have er a big turkey .
I'll goNONMET and getNONMET one this afternoon .
And I've gotNONMET ta getNONMET erm No !
It's your granddad's birthday in n it , on Tuesday ?
Urgh !
Sit down !
Yeah .
I'll getNONMET him a card .
Vicki !
Well I'm only StopNONMET pullingNONMET her hair !
I'm only giving cards out because as you knowNONMET nan doesn't botherNONMET with birthdays Yeah sitNONMET er !
Terrible !
Them two !
Pulling hair !
Well you're pullingNONMET , you little bugger !
And I supposeNONMET I better getNONMET er Carl's birthday card while I'm at it .
oi !
You sawNONMET that card I broughtNONMET for Andy didn't you ?
Oh I didn't showNONMET you it .
Just comeNONMET this way .
Have a swinging birthday Take this take this no , it's your birthday have a swinging time on ComeNONMET here !
and then inside it saidMET gotNONMET ta makeMET sure you give in any no , let's hopeNONMET you you get Up you getNONMET !
what you've got !
laugh Yo you've got a .
GetNONMET Julie a card as well .
I should thrashNONMET her !
I ought to goNONMET to the party .
Oh I thinkNONMET I've gotNONMET one .
Oh yes .
Yeah , it's a lovely from erm Avon for Anne .
But er be fine for the baby and everything .
And where else ?
But er That's right , yeah .
where do you put your so I ordered a so many mum mum !
That's right .
hotel .
Not quite there .
GetNONMET that hat .
Cos I saidNONMET .
Yeah she used to nice .
Ah no !
No !
nought point ten and goingMET up point two of a second , that is fast !
Yeah .
Have you gotNONMET ta getNONMET a card for Julie as well ?
First leg look .
that's what's Yeah , Vicki boughtNONMET a birthday card for nanny when it comesMET round .
what I reckonMET , easy that , that easy to getMET that far outright .
laugh uncle .
There are !
New baby .
Oh and it's blue as well !
Yeah .
I knewNONMET I'd gotNONMET one somewhere .
That's from cough That's the I gotNONMET a wedding wedding day card there that's the one .
you don't knowNONMET anybody that's gettingNONMET marriedNONMET do you ?
I thinkNONMET that's .
And our boys been there haven't they ?
Canada .
Oh right !
This is  fixingNONMET it in n it ?
laugh There was a Aha .
charity match .
Got one haven't I ?
ComeMET on !
No .
No we , well you knowNONMET I boughtNONMET You you getNONMET the handle who's some of that for ?
you get , hold onto the handle no not there !
Erm I'd likeNONMET to seeMET whoever winsNONMET this .
Erm making a car !
Can't waitNONMET to seeNONMET their face !
Well my mum gotNONMET it for What , whichever gonNONMET na get mi , if somebody , they getNONMET a medal don't they ?
Well mum , mum gotNONMET me this when It is cos a friend of mine had a baby and we thoughtNONMET it was gonNONMET na be a boy and she had another bloody girl !
laugh First !
She'd already boughtNONMET the bloody card !
Cos there's only three lots been down in't there ?
Four .
Oh well the French .
then aren't they ?
Can't goMET any higher .
Stu , they'll goMET down now lookNONMET , you watchNONMET !
Oh , they're second !
A ca car go down .
A car !
No it isn't granddad .
They're in the house now .
A car !
What ?
Shut up !
Mummy !
That's .
Yes .
That was Vicki's Eight point one of a second !
car !
Mm .
Yes .
It's my granddad's in n it ?
Yeah !
And Vicki's Seventy six .
!
WaitNONMET !
They're gettingNONMET slower !
A A key a Ah .
Ah key ah key !
How can you ?
He Ah !
Which one's that of ours ?
The second England soon in n it ?
Yeah .
the first .
Daddy !
They were ninth weren't they ?
Well they ain't gonNONMET na stayMET there long !
We gotNONMET all the big blokes to comeNONMET yet !
They gotNONMET Vanden Yeah .
What's his name ?
HangMET on a minute !
Out the way a minute !
Oh oh !
The German ?
Popoloff , no what's his name ?
Er Popoloff !
Hopa .
Hopa .
I wonderNONMET if Hopa will getMET out of that ?
They gotNONMET bars up their sleeves in't they ?
The Hopa's of Germany .
Andy Pandy for What was that ?
That's a new one .
A slip .
Well it's a I seeMET !
Mummy !
Mum !
Oh full points !
Mum !
Mum !
Cor !
Not good !
Or watch Kirsty .
Oh well it should be fun now , Kirsty !
Oh well TellNONMET .
Kirsty and Sam the other night , they were punching shit out of each other weren't they !
they plenty of ti , they got plenty Where are they now ?
It won't be all Kirsty now , they're in one already !
Germany .
Carl will speakNONMET to Michael now .
Well di , did Andy wantNONMET a boy ?
No !
He wantedNONMET another girl didn't he ?
No , he wantedNONMET a boy .
No , cos Julie wantedNONMET a boy and Andy wantedNONMET another girl !
He wantedNONMET a boy !
Well why did he sayNONMET to me he wantedNONMET a girl ?
I done , was having .
Cos she was something one night , well saidNONMET yeah that she wantsNONMET more than , he wantsNONMET more than two .
If it was a girl !
he'd have a if it was another girl he would have another one .
Vicki !
Yep !
Gently !
I knowNONMET you !
Be nice !
Ooh ooh ooh ooh !
Vicki !
Gently !
You little sod !
laugh oi !
GoNONMET and do it with your dolly , goMET on !
Where is she ?
GoMET on I'll goNONMET and getNONMET her .
That's sick !
Disgusting in n it !
MindNONMET your foot Vicki !
ComeNONMET here !
KeepNONMET still Vicki !
MindNONMET the chair !
Oh God !
It's her !
What is it about hair ?
She didn't hearNONMET us !
Nearly !
She did !
oi !
Gently !
Oh !
Give her that back !
Gently !
GoNONMET and playNONMET !
GoMET on then !
No !
Get off !
Well letNONMET goNONMET then !
Give it back to Stephanie nicely !
ComeNONMET over here !
No !
Who comeNONMET seeNONMET Yeah .
you last night ?
Di .
No she didn't !
Fifty eight point Nana and granddad .
What is it gonNONMET na be ?
Di !
No !
TakeMET fifty three .
No !
Who comeNONMET to seeNONMET you ?
Fifty five Granddad .
fifty six , fifty seven , fifty eight Granddad No , who's gotNONMET a blue van ?
Well That's three in one is it ?
No Pete !
Just the three .
Three in one .
Pete ?
Uncle Three in two .
Stuart .
I gotMET three in one to come yet !
Banda !
And they Hopa yet , for Germany .
This is Havvaher .
Gerald !
Gerald .
Gerald .
It's all on that fall .
laugh No this is one !
Yeah but is that Canada one or Canada ?
No you're not having any sweets cos It was Canada , was it Canada one or Canada two ?
Yes my okay .
Joe giveNONMET , oh yeah Joe will giveNONMET you sweets won't he ?
Ah !
I likeNONMET pee pee !
GiveNONMET me !
Yes , yes we UpsetMET .
gonNONMET na getNONMET them now .
Yeah ?
GoMET on then you'll be able to seeNONMET mummy from work .
Granddad .
I've been up the bath .
Oh yeah .
He comeNONMET home Thursday .
Here are Phil .
That's what ?
Has he gotMET that thing goingMET ?
I don't wanNONMET na make .
Yeah I thinkNONMET so .
Nanny !
Yes .
What ?
Why have you gotMET the sound up on the telly then ?
Philip !
Cos I'm listeningNONMET to the kids .
Philip !
You and the bloody telly , he satNONMET there with the ashtray in his hand and all bloody ash is fallingNONMET out the bottom !
Just rubNONMET it in .
Who's that ?
Here are .
I du n noNONMET .
Is the guy with this ?
Yeah .
This is the Hopa , this German man .
Weeee No , this is a Swede !
You got a nappy on !
Bander .
Oh !
No .
They've already wonNONMET a two man bobsleigh .
Ha !
oi !
Yeah , that fucking England should have wonNONMET that !
Well yeah but that's life in n it ?
Fucking so , Grundy , fucking The lost it all !
They're having fucking !
Thorpe wasn't too bad .
For the first leg he was Oh it's cold in n it ?
Yeah .
And really windy do you thinkNONMET ?
The course was crap !
That man comingNONMET to do Here are lookNONMET !
my windows again Thursday .
But I but I Mm .
hit eye .
And what about ?
laugh You don't likeNONMET him do you ?
No .
Which one ?
laugh But they keepMET it .
They keepMET the lead Well don't they ?
And they don't .
Here are !
Most of them getMET back into it in a big way .
ComeNONMET and cleanNONMET my windows and I owedNONMET him from the last time .
That's why they do it in the middle but it's GoMET on !
the first still .
Car !
ComeNONMET and lookNONMET !
Ooh ee !
Mm .
GoneNONMET .
He's harmless thought ain't he ?
Yeah he's gone .
I sitNONMET a mummy .
Don't you thinkNONMET it's horrible round here ?
Ooh !
That is , this .
But he won't do them now !
Not only that , if you paid thirty pound you could goNONMET down there couldn't you ?
Ah mummy !
There's a Yeah ?
I meanNONMET he wantedNONMET Ah .
to keep them Ah .
.
!
Mummy !
They're not interested in them Yeah ?
now cos .
But the thing is you won't They're seconds The thing is So where's England ?
England's been knockedMET right down now haven't they ?
Seventh .
Hey !
Vicki !
Vicki !
But erm but the thing is they ca , they co the blokes don't have to behind don't seeNONMET that much do they ?
They gotMET their head down , seeNONMET that Right !
Play with the other one Sam ?
Here's Hopa !
SeeNONMET they gotMET they're head down all the time .
Have to get out one of them dolls Phil .
GonNONMET na have to getNONMET one of them dolls , she lovesNONMET them .
Yeah alright .
Alright .
He's got hasn't he ?
Oh yeah .
Play with the other one !
LookNONMET !
Play with that one !
That one's nice over by there cos it's gotMET the long hair .
Yeah but one's not gonNONMET na fit !
laugh Yep !
I knockedMET out by four .
I'll playNONMET er Germans .
I'm waitingNONMET for you .
Germans .
Even waitNONMET outside .
German's off !
Mummy !
Ah !
Vicki !
Where's she's goingNONMET to ?
Where's she goingNONMET ?
Not me !
You're not to come down until baby !
Aye ?
saidNONMET so .
Fifty eight point one .
What about the baby lookNONMET !
!
laugh Mm !
Eight pound !
Ooh !
That's a weight of Did you tellNONMET her we'll waitNONMET here ?
I'm waitingNONMET here so But ma mummy !
Don't you thinkNONMET so ?
We left off eight pound and Mummy !
at three and a half months !
Yeah , I meanNONMET personally .
She .
She .
That's right .
It's !
Oh you wantNONMET in that do you ?
ThinkNONMET so .
Right .
No !
Going in all over that's the position anyway !
There are Phil That's from last night .
if I give you that four .
Alright .
Vicki !
Mm mm !
Wee wee !
Is that for me ?
That's for your sister .
There you goMET !
Oop !
Had my Ah shit on my foot !
cos I was late .
laugh Wee wee !
Do you seeNONMET Brookside last night ?
No !
No cos he don't letNONMET me watchNONMET it !
Crap !
You don't !
It wasn't me last night !
That's crap !
Why don't you watchNONMET it ?
last night .
Urgh !
Hello !
It was good !
Then I do normally watchNONMET it with you .
You didn't watchNONMET it last night .
Only Mondays .
Your lying again Well again to me !
I'm not allowedNONMET to Wednesdays cos your mum don't watchNONMET it on a Wednesday !
Well that's nothing to do with me !
You can't blameNONMET me Oh that's nice !
then can you ?
Can't blameNONMET me for that !
Er end of .
Cos she was would she ?
cake Who ?
Cake ?
No !
for her birthday .
Yeah , a big cake .
GotNONMET her some .
SaidMET Happy Birthday Well na we , they the cake and er she wouldn't wouldn't sit down so Terry keptNONMET sayingNONMET to her right now what you doing ?
She saidNONMET , hangMET on Wee wee !
a minute !
They come right up .
CalledNONMET us all in the lounge and gaveNONMET us a bottle of Taboo back in with her , like .
and about that much leftNONMET in the bottle so er Seventy mile an hour .
wentNONMET and gotNONMET the lemonade so I was tippingNONMET it in , so Terry goesNONMET , he goesMET I'll have it all !
Urgh !
laugh ThrowMET us a drink !
Yeah .
laugh Yeah , one point two .
Gerald comeNONMET in and he saidNONMET you been on the piss already ?
I saidNONMET am I hell !
I saidNONMET I gotNONMET ta be bloody sober !
You didn't you get ?
You gotNONMET cake as well then ?
Yeah !
BoughtNONMET me a chocolate sponge thing .
Oh Gary and me and I feel her and Vicki had a piece .
And he saidNONMET , yeah take what .
And I saidNONMET , well I'll put it back in the fridge and she saidNONMET no , she saidNONMET takeNONMET it home she saidNONMET Yeah but I boughtNONMET it for you .
when you're thinkingNONMET about it it's not even a second out .
What's wrong with her ?
So then she come round and she saidNONMET I don't even do this for Karen !
Another one down there .
She saidNONMET Karen wouldn't be very happy if she found out !
Ooh yes !
If she finds out .
I saidNONMET , but who's gonNONMET na tellNONMET her ?
Who me ?
It's a lot in n it Ga ?
So I thoughtNONMET well I'm not !
What ?
It's a lot in this in n it ?
Yeah .
Yeah !
And then she saidNONMET er when she All that !
comeNONMET home from work she saidNONMET I've been looking round in Boots and that for you , she saidNONMET er I've decidedNONMET , she saidNONMET I was gonNONMET na getNONMET you a gift voucher .
Twice you've just I'm watchingMET you two !
for for Marks and Spencers or Ah ?
somewhere like that she saidNONMET , but I've er decidedNONMET not to , she saidNONMET I'll giveNONMET you the money on Saturday if that's alright ?
Only .
You meanNONMET what I saidNONMET So I saidNONMET er but I knowNONMET you're off to Torquay on Friday with Di , cos that's him hintingNONMET , thankNONMET God it's out !
laugh So she saidNONMET er After callingNONMET me a bastard and all this now so she I , I'll sortMET you out on Saturday !
So What Ah !
next Saturday ?
Ooh !
laugh You loveNONMET them really don't you ?
So she saidNONMET er it won't only be fiver cos she saidNONMET Oh yeah !
you can't getNONMET a lot with a fiver .
Yeah .
So I thoughtNONMET well !
Put it back !
Probably five pound fifty !
Yeah !
Yeah !
I thoughtNONMET about that !
ListenNONMET no wonder he's world champion he can goNONMET affordNONMET to skiing , his dad's a multi-millionaire !
But er no , we were talkingNONMET and she saidNONMET if I giveNONMET you the money you won't goMET and spendNONMET it on the Yeah .
kids will you ?
I saidNONMET , you gotNONMET ta be jokingNONMET !
laugh I saidNONMET , I normally do He's loaded ain't he ?
but I saidNONMET no , this time I saidNONMET He goesMET for it don't he ?
not likely !
Yeah .
Mm .
With Vicki just having her birthday she's gotNONMET all she needsNONMET now isn't it ?
Well that's it and .
But she hasn't gotNONMET a helicopter .
You leaveMET him alone !
LeaveMET him alone !
I wantNONMET a !
?
No , I'll goMET and spendNONMET it in one myself .
That's alright .
You'll have to off to do something like that , communal I wantNONMET a wee wee !
And Di will be really pissed off Anyway by the time we've walkedNONMET round all them shops !
Ooh !
Ooh !
Ooh ooh ooh ooh !
Just there on the last No !
ain't he ?
I wantNONMET a wee wee !
Well how comeMET Yeah they're just showingNONMET some of the mistakes as well the windy down .
Ooh !
Here comes the I wantNONMET a wee wee !
I wantNONMET a Sammy wantsNONMET a wee wee !
Ooh !
Ooh !
Ooh !
Ooh !
Ooh !
Ooh !
Ooh !
Ooh !
Ooh !
You fellers I'll getNONMET up !
Ooh !
He's gonNONMET na do the sound effects !
Down down and out .
Wee wee !
Wee !
Wee wee !
laugh SeeNONMET him .
No , no .
Do it yourself !
Yeah , he's alright .
GoNONMET away !
Yeah !
GoNONMET away you !
GoNONMET away !
Well wonNONMET yesterday Aye !
to the , the No !
But th WeeNONMET weeNONMET .
No , you don't wantNONMET a wee wee cos I have to goNONMET .
A wee wee !
No , you don't !
You got a nappy on !
Ooh !
Oh a big miss of that gear though in n it ?
Where's daddy ?
Where's daddy ?
BetNONMET your popular with Nanny !
I am aren't I ?
What is it ?
GetNONMET up !
You loveNONMET it really don't you ?
Oh , what ?
The hole in the head , ain't you ?
Yeah .
ComeMET on Phil !
Alright then .
It's alright Phil , I'll have him .
You meanNONMET aye ?
Yes , his next month out of his wages !
ListenNONMET to me !
Shut up !
Can't getNONMET no birthday money out of him !
Who ?
Hurry up Phil !
Any of yours ?
What thing ?
You shouldn't putNONMET there .
Yeah , but yeah I do sayNONMET so !
ComeMET on daddy !
Tomorrow morning , go down to Marks and come back for my wages .
Oh that's alright then .
My twenty five percent here cor that'll be an expensive month !
laugh I've already had mine .
You'll getNONMET this and nothing more !
And you Wow !
will get this and for twenty five pounds , aye ?
laugh Well I'd better goNONMET and getNONMET changedNONMET hadn't I ?
Twenty four !
Yeah .
Shall I goNONMET and have a wash now ?
We're ready then ?
We're ready !
I've only gotNONMET ta changeNONMET Ready ?
him .
Just have to .
So we'll seeNONMET you later !
Yeah .
What time ?
We'll be about laugh They lastNONMET a day when they're old look my mother what they really lastNONMET a day .
Stephan help yourself .
The rose bush was not was not prunedNONMET this year so I doubtNONMET if we're goingNONMET to have many flowers .
But there are .
SeeNONMET lookNONMET !
LookNONMET at this just one rose .
but they just whither very quickly .
So whether to leave but that sort is waiting .
LookNONMET macho .
Yes ?
Ooh !
Heavy this is .
Never make up for a Is that a male .
No Have you madeMET arrangements to meetNONMET him ?
Yeah tomorrow Tomorrow Hmm hmm Where're you seeingNONMET him ?
By the Sycamore gardens in Kensington .
I thinksNONMET it's near Denise .
What is she doing now ?
I taughtNONMET her the flat The Finnigan and Arms ?
Arms Must be very well off then laugh No captain she has her six months leave .
You knowNONMET it's goping to be soldNONMET this flat .
Did he ?
And she's goingNONMET to lookMET for a flat somewhere else of course Yes but that's where Rothchild lives in Finnimore House .
Yes .
Yes .
Ahh .
sniff she liveNONMET in England Mmm She Yes yes Does Ian too ?
Where is he workingNONMET ?
Mm ?
Can't rememberNONMET which one Hmm ?
One of those old ones Yeah in London or in Brussels or ?
No here .
Yeah hmm hmm Yes it's always a difficult subject .
It's a most it is not an international subject .
But there is such a thing as international law There is but I meanNONMET it is and more and more people choosesNONMET more and more Hmm but there's military service Mm mm Mm mm Yeah .
It's goingNONMET to be um been to his grandmother's flat near your place Hmm hm Near the other side of the motorway .
What is it calledNONMET ?
Westland ?
Hmm mm .
Which side is it ?
Is it the one where they have those terrible blocks ?
I almost thinkNONMET so .
I thinkNONMET it's in a block .
Yes um .
Hmm hmm .
May be I'm wrong but I thinkNONMET it's in a block .
And his mother livedNONMET there and she can't liveNONMET on her own any more .
Could he movedNONMET south .
Where where would she have livedNONMET ?
No In a home with a nursing home ?
No Any where else ?
Hmm hmm She wantsNONMET to take over Hmm hmm Floor you knowNONMET you had a middle floor .
MoveNONMET in there but letNONMET her stand Probably has because of the staircases for old people Yeah They can't manageMET the staircase I don't knowNONMET how she could manageMET the stairs Yes there are two flights of stairs aren't there ?
Hmm .
Well if she has a hip replacement operation she'll be all right .
Mm Surprising how many of these Yeah ?
Yeah .
Hip replacement operations Yeah ?
Rheumatism , arthritis , those are their great worries Hmm hmm and deafness hmm Yeah It's awful if you can't hearNONMET Yeah you knowNONMET what Cathy speakNONMET at the radio SayingNONMET that you now ahm replaceNONMET the bones of crippled fingers Really ?
Yeah Oh I don't thinkNONMET I shall go in for that .
Well yes I knowNONMET Really ?
Did you knowNONMET that ?
Yes I never had a replacement Replacement with what ?
Elbow no knees I supposeNONMET elbows as well Hmm Knees and fingers .
Yes .
Yes .
But you're never And some kind of If you're very twisted And nerves too when you have a finger whose paralysed and couldn't removeNONMET it and putNONMET in a nerve and then they could workMET again .
You can removeNONMET ?
I don't knowNONMET do they to be transplantedMET laugh you walkNONMET on crutches for the rest of your life .
laugh It's when you needNONMET Yes It won't workMET It will workMET How do you knowNONMET Hips don't workMET properly hmm Some do No not really No .
They're all there but their their umbrellas and their walking sticks laugh Yes You don't thinkNONMET they workMET properly ?
Yes of course they do workMET properly .
What do you of course ?
You knowNONMET a new elbow , a new knee and you thinkNONMET it's going to the like your own elbow ?
Yes No it's not A piece of metal or plastic ?
Hmm hmm No of course not it helpsMET Yes but heavens you knowNONMET you'll never climbNONMET with that and you'll never climbNONMET the stairs laugh No ?
Of course not dear me !
Some coffee ?
Yes I do very much some coffee Hmm yes Good Why don't we shareNONMET it ?
ComeMET on No thanks comeMET on Stephan its No thanks One should finishNONMET it comeMET on No thankNONMET you if Patrick doesn't wantNONMET I can't eatNONMET it I don't thinkNONMET so he had a big lunch Oh Not much to finishNONMET Oh !
All my Ah we have to still tellNONMET Patrick about haven't we ?
About ?
Yes because he really wantsNONMET to knowNONMET .
What ?
Are they to leaveNONMET ?
Yes yes Have you vegetables No no No no really Really ?
Sure Well you knowNONMET I don't mindNONMET one bitNONMET no ?
No Okay .
Patrick you knowNONMET where I would likeNONMET to goNONMET and lookMET at this thing we have to Whose that ?
Hmm ?
We have to giveMET an answer .
What's that ?
About this holiday you knowNONMET this arrangement Which arrangement ?
Well the the hotel we are goingNONMET to stayNONMET Oh !
yes well Yes ?
I would likeNONMET to I would rather stayNONMET here .
Hmm ?
I'd rather stayNONMET here You would ?
I really would No I'd rather A fortnight in Bromley would do me splendidly hmm ?
laugh I would rather Buying laugh and they finished off laugh You can buyNONMET them one day and bring them back the next I really would if I had a choice I would stayNONMET here Well you haven't gotMET the choice laugh That wasn't heavy was it ?
Not too many pro not too much protein Yeah .
No it was fine it was very good .
I thinkNONMET I'm goingNONMET to have I will have gainedMET weight when You thinkNONMET so ?
Hmm .
laugh laugh When did you eatNONMET when did you eatNONMET your chips ?
About seven yes Not here ?
When did you have your practice About a week ago No Oh when ?
At six .
yes ?
supper ?
No But you don't putMET on weight so there .
Well I don't knowNONMET .
No .
I've never seenNONMET you fat Hmm I have Hmm ?
Really ?
When I wasn't excited Really ?
Yes Who cookedNONMET there ?
I thinkNONMET .
It was that's when I just came back from Switzerland I thinkNONMET .
Not very much But she wasn't with you ?
Yes Ah yes I thoughtNONMET Yes ould rather stayNONMET here No Patrick where would you would you mindNONMET to goNONMET to ?
Oh I don't wantNONMET to goNONMET to What else then ?
Well I meanNONMET just lookNONMET at the map you're you're goingNONMET to and then you're goingNONMET to .
Well I don't mindNONMET .
Oh certainly not I'm stayingNONMET at or the I am not traipsingMET across France .
No ?
Oh !
laugh I don't wantNONMET to spendMET a fortnight on the road .
Well I do .
Waht do you wantNONMET to goNONMET to for ?
But I It's miles it's miles away It doesn't matterNONMET No no let's goNONMET to Mont Dor Nice or Lyon , somewhere on the road somewhere on the route I'm not goingNONMET to spendMET a week on the route laugh It's a very nice route Yes ?
Lyon ?
Lyon Lyon Lyon I knowNONMET so well in Lyon .
Well you eatNONMET well Yes well I don't wantNONMET to eatNONMET well laugh And I wantNONMET to eatNONMET well and I wantNONMET to be comfortable and I wantNONMET to stayNONMET in good hotel Well the one in St Maxim's doesn't do bad which is closer But wouldn't there be a people there ?
No Still in early September ?
When it's sort of At at Lyon will be alright then the might be all right but right over on the Italian branch it might be all right mmm yes Yes I am not goingNONMET up never I am No .
Who wantsNONMET to goNONMET there ?
It will rainNONMET No it won't .
Who saidNONMET .
I likeNONMET it There is September I likeNONMET Well you have been campingNONMET there once and that's enough Hmm It isn't Of course I thinkNONMET it is .
We have seenNONMET Brittany .
No it's really lovely Hmm .
Oh I don't thinkNONMET I don't thinkNONMET I wantNONMET to goNONMET .
Ah who wantsNONMET to goNONMET to Montu laugh You knowNONMET the peoples ah you knowNONMET If I'm goingNONMET to the South of France I wantNONMET to stayNONMET there for awhile Ah no !
Yes I don't wantNONMET to France is enormous country .
I knowNONMET I don't wantNONMET to spendMET my time travelling Don't you rememberNONMET the last time it was so beautiful goingNONMET across across at home .
It was really beautiful I shall goNONMET alone this coffee Kathy ?
No I'm afraid not .
I'd likeNONMET to Coffee SitNONMET and eatNONMET that's what he wantsNONMET .
I just don't wantNONMET that .
laugh laugh I thinkNONMET we should have different holidays .
laugh You knowNONMET he's entitledMET to his holidays but I don't wantNONMET to sitNONMET laugh and readNONMET newspapers no thankNONMET you .
Oh !
This is in your travelling around Yes Well He does don't you He did but not that much No he doesn't He rushesNONMET to Borg To where ?
To La Borg .
I'm not rushingNONMET to La Borg anymore .
Yes well you seeMET ?
He rushesNONMET to La Borg and that's also in Italy Yes well They thinkNONMET can not be as far enough laugh Hmm hmm overlap EatingNONMET eatingNONMET all day long overlap From place to the from another to the and backwards again laugh It's very nice walks through through the Merryland Really ?
To ah to .
We're goingNONMET for a walk to .
It's just the first visit We wentNONMET to Floyds I thinkNONMET we wentNONMET Floods Yes .
That's a sweet little village Yes Yes you have to careful with er that a holiday doesn't just doesn't becomeNONMET an expensive way of being uncomfortable you knowNONMET But it isn't Oh !
Oh yes it is .
To me it's an expensive way of being uncomfortable .
Well to me no .
So I'm more comfortable here than I am on holiday .
I sleepNONMET better laugh Hmm I do .
No .
GivesMET you these hotels aren't comfortable , beds , noisy neighbours unusual food laugh Dear me !
laugh What next ?
Obliged to makeMET polite conversation all the time oh !
With who ?
laugh I don't knowNONMET laugh Behind your newspaper ?
ComeMET on don't inventMET you knowNONMET ?
Ah !
It was so beautiful you knowNONMET Where ?
GoingNONMET through France ah the Severn and then all these towns .
It was fabulous .
Mmm really ?
Really really Yes providedNONMET yes but I would rather stayNONMET in one place We should stopNONMET at any one place GoingNONMET to seeNONMET to seeNONMET ghosts No what rubbish Lyon is a very nice town I don't wantNONMET to Lyon it's very nice Yes I'd likeNONMET to seeNONMET it for a day or two but not for a fortnight But Lyon is a very big town .
It's the bigger It is But I'm not goingNONMET on holiday in a town Oh !
Why not ?
No .
Well you can spendMET some days on the Cote d'Azure I don't mindNONMET for about two three days Go laugh laugh laugh Well yes why not ?
No no laugh Very nice very Sure strong hmm ?
But the coffee Did you buyNONMET it in Bromley ?
Yes .
I just wantNONMET it no no I'd likeNONMET that small one .
May be I will eatNONMET only half of it .
I'm not eatingNONMET whole of it .
So no it's too much .
So it looksNONMET awfully fresh the wretches madeMET me almost squashed it .
They're nice when they're fresh .
Yeah Isobel likesNONMET scones .
Is there someone who likesNONMET them without currants ?
Hmm .
You're not supposed to sayNONMET but laugh Not too bad mmm I have very little though .
I am also being careful .
No I thinkNONMET I have half .
You don't have to to watch out Scones .
Where is scones ?
No Not too many miles Hmm don't thinkNONMET we've ever been in Large belt large belt of the community in easterly Hmm it's beautiful and the team is a frontier town No , it's not Oh no no no No no it's before Monaco .
Manto is before Monaco .
Manto is very close to a very nice place calledNONMET But isn't Manto near the Italian border ?
Well it's closer to the Italian border than Nice is Hmm but it's still it's in between Nice and Monaco .
Hmm .
What is the frontier town ?
France Benzaminia is the frontier town it's in Okay yes It's quite nice we have a very nice little villages on - you have , El Yeah Quite nice on on above In the mountains ?
I knowNONMET Alec has been there El is beautiful Is it ?
Well I likeNONMET .
Yes but we're not goingNONMET to Brittany We are .
It's off our route laugh you likeNONMET all your but thinkNONMET what you missedMET I'd likeNONMET to signNONMET it now Mmm laugh Bromley laugh The best French cider I have drunk is a French cider soldMET by by Sainsburys .
Quite What ?
The best French cider is cider soldMET by Sainsburys one that I've drunkNONMET .
Well , I'm not a cider expert .
I likeNONMET and the others .
I really likedNONMET it .
I lovedNONMET to go back Well you can go back You'll have share that If you're goingNONMET in er if you're goingNONMET in that direction hmm ?
No no no no no I I could but I have to be very careful I'm goingNONMET to blow Really ?
Oh you had better stop Can't Just giveMET me a week to have in here .
You don't have a coffee to be going on ?
Hmm ?
with the soda They're terrible tense No just Vaison doesn't likeNONMET sultana .
Do you knowNONMET that ?
What does he .. ?
He picks all out Oh !
Isobel wantsNONMET He doesn't likeNONMET cinnamin goping either Isobel wantsNONMET to goNONMET to Brazil Yes But well I meanNONMET it's rather stupid for how long ?
Three weeks .
Oh !
But can Vaison takeMET the three weeks holiday ?
That's six I don't knowNONMET .
We're very reluctant to have to takeMET three weeks holiday .
Will you ?
overlap Very I meanNONMET overlap We've gotMET five weeks discouragedNONMET from takingMET more than a fortnight at a time .
Hmm hmm .
In Belgium many people do takeMET three weeks at a time Really ?
Hmm .
Sometimes here in London .
Really ?
Yes .
You do come back with somebody sittingNONMET They liveNONMET for like one holiday which is the summer holiday to stayNONMET away you knowNONMET ?
laugh I just come back Perhaps when they come back they've gotMET six months you knowNONMET they've gotMET a month's work on their hands .
I knowNONMET .
Some else's sittingNONMET at their desk ?
Well not you knowNONMET cleaning laugh so I don't knowNONMET what kind of work they do .
Oh well if you're here that's all right
